UPLINK 

THE FORUM FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING 

12 

March, 1991 

# The Count of San Francisco 

By Judy Miller, Special Projects Editor San Francisco Chronicle 

The San Francisco Chronicle's reporting on the 1990 census adhered to the finest traditions of com- puter-assisted journalism. Sometimes it seemed that everything that could $0 wrong did go wrong. 

The Census Bureausaprised the California Medias by releasing the data smonth before it was expected. The magnetic tape containing the data arrived right on deadline while the presses were running And then the rane drive broke down. 

But despite problems we published better and more detailed reports on census data than any other paper in California, mostly because we had programmed our software to do its work before the nsus data arrived. 

With the support of top editors, the paper plans to use computers to improve both projects and daily reporting. 

The census project got off the ground when 

## Hartford's Toxic Front Page 

By Brant Houston and Kenton Robinson Hartford Courant 

You call this environmental protection? 

- Connecticut manufacturers are failing to report millions of pounds of toxic emissions to the state as required by law. 
- Connecticut manufacturers are actually emitting more ozone-eating Freon into the atmosphere than they were three years ago, when they pledged to reduce emissions. 

Some manufacturers are seriously damaging mu- 

Editor Tim Schreiner and I teamed up to prepare for the release of the 1990 census data for California. Schreiner was a whiz at understanding the census and cruching numbers, and I was a graduate of MICAR's weeklong workshop and knew how to import 9-track magnetic tane information into a personal computer and manipulate with the database management program, XDB. we also recrunted Library Director Richard Geiger and Systems Specialists Gerald Jampol for assistance with research and technical matters The team's combined experience became key when the U.S. Census Bureau, which had promised to release its California data "no earlier than mid- March," instead released the information on February 25, with only two weeks notice. 

The first wave of data consisted of total popula- tion figures, racial and ethnic population, and num- bers of housing units broken down by county, census 

Census Continued on Page 2 

Plugging In The Dallas Morning News 

By Allen Pusey, Assistant Projects Editor Dallas Morning News 

It would be an exaggeration to say I was pistol-whipped into attending a Missouri Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting seminar in Janu- ary. 

But not much. That may have been an advantage, however, in our efforts to start up a computer-assisted re- porting program here at The Dallas Morning News. Although we have yet to produce a single 

Hartford Continued on Page 3


Plugging In Continued on Page 4 

Census Cont. 

possible to import 1980 California census data in the precise format and layout of the 1990 data before it arrived so that the two files easily could be merge 

track and block. In California, where minorities are expected to outnumber whites within 10 to 15 years, the growth in population by racial and ethnic groups between 1980 and 1990 was the obvious lead to our first-day 

We then figured out what XDB commands W wanted to perform on the merged 1980 and 1990 data and saved them. For example, we stored queries in XDB that asked the computer to calculate the total percentage of minorities versus whites in the state, in each county and in each city. 

Minorities make up 43% of California's citizenry 

## 7tw. Pype AI 

ny'tour . in us Astag Axame the in Californa. with the largest number commentment in LA is Santa Clare Amage and in Financiace counties 

## Han Programme 

The states black populacion in created readverty taxing the past M years, burthester x master in the sale problem dropped from the in I 

The Canewa abroad that who sua reciat group 1 w on per- cant et Californians, a figure us Injuried may pample of Hispanx which the destry - m ciaby as white 

CALIFORNIA DAY AREA MINORITY POPULATION

Record reimburly
 by California county
 199C

1% 10%
 11 20
 21 29
 30 46
 45 7:

Percent Minerity
 by boy Apon
 county
 1990

IS to 10%
 11 20
 21 29
 30 4
 45 71


The altho pope leites totals 82 parant of the note regulation, a diction Dona sam adian the group adverted in invoice of us state population 

Thanks now I at Marc more - - - asian das" Empartal Los Aogetes and San Francisco There are also 136 class board the n up i there were 74 ** with 

They were able to produce stories and graphics showing the percentage of minorities in each of the stat's 58 counties, the growth in minority popula- tion between 1980 and 1990 and population totals for every city in the state. 

only six entreptic etcles in the Bey Arm tay Pate Also, Dats City Wishoned and isake Chr. in the that to are in JOSE in CM Evelle for Pregnata Pinebucg Gamer and - 

story. 

In preparation for C-Day, the paper purchased a 9-track tape from the Census Bureau that gave sample census data for portions of Washington state. The purpose of this so-called "Dress Rehersal" tape was to familiarize journalists with the contents of the 1990 census tape. 

The census data didn't reach the paper until 9 p.m., nine hours after originally promised. By 9:30 p.m., about 15 minutes before the second-edition deadline, we were punching out numbers for demographics writer and the graphics artists. 

The record layout for this tape closely matched the layout of the 1990 California release. Thus, it was 

We stored commands that asked the computer to calculate percentage growth for each minority group between 1980 and 1990. We even figured out the commands for our second- and third-day stories, which gave racial and ethnic snapshots of all nine Bay Area counties. 

The preparation paid off. On the day the census information was to arrive, the tape drive broke down. Fortunately, we had logged enough practice hours with it to get it going again. 

"The census data didn't reach the paper until 9 p.m., nine hours after originally promised. By 9:30 p.m., about 15 minutes before the second-edition deadline, we were punching out num- bers for our demographics writer and the graphics artists." 

## Success Story News 

## Startling Population Changes 

Last December, UPLINK featured a story produced by Chris Szechenyi, an investigative re- porter at WRC-TV in Washington, D.C. 

Szechenyi used a computer analysis of the Food and Drug Administration's Medical Device Report to create a multi-partseries on faulty defibrillators, the device used to jump-start hearts that have stopped beating. NBC Nightly News featured his story. 

This month, the story won the National Head- liner's Award for investigative reporting by a televi- sion station. On the same day Szechenyi learned of tb award. he was laid-off by his station due to budge cuts. 

Page 2


## Hartford Cont. 

a lot of story ideas while looking at the reports and discovered many flaws in the reports.) We totaled the emissions, made a top-ten list of manufacturers and chemicals, etc., so we could put out a report six months ahead of the state's annual report. But while comparing our database with the 1988 tapes, which were from the federal EPA, we found that some manufacturers had neglected to send their reports to the state over the past years, meaning 

nicipal sewer treatment plants by dumping toxic chemi- cals into the plants, thus causing sewage to pour into Connecticut water and costing taxpayers tens of thou- sands of dollars in repairs. 

- Connecticut's Department of Environmental Protec- tion has for three years left out tens of millions of pounds of toxic chemical emissions in its annual reports to the public; thus significantly downplaying the amount of poisons dumped and stored in local landfills. 

These are some of the facts we've been able to reveal over the past six months with just a rudimentary use of the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI). The inven- tory is composed of annual reports from certain manu- facturers on how much of 300 or so toxic chemicals they emit. While the reports have their shortcomings, they are good for giving an indication of how bad pollution is in your state and for cross-referencing with other files. 

"When the state finally came out with its report, we did a story on how it downplayed emissions by leaving out 14 million pounds of toxic chemicals shipped offsite by manufacturers." 

We began our work by getting computer tapes of the inventory for 1988 and with the use of Nine- Track Express and XDB setting up eight different tables of information on what toxic chemicals manu- facturers in Connecticut reported emitting. 

We thought of doing a story from those tapes last summer, but realized that the paper reports for 1989 had just been filed - or should have been - with the state Department of Environmental Protection. 

We knew that the state would take months to type those reports into a database, so we decided to enter the information onto our own database using laptops. This had been done by several reporters (including Dave Davis at the Cleveland Plain Dealer, who gave us the idea) and environmentalists with good results, so we plunged in and created our own 1989 database of 1,500 reports and verified it over a period of three weeks by ourselves and with the help of a researcher. Our database was an abbreviated version, quite similar to the summaries issued on skette by the National Technical Information Serv- Ice. (Data entry is really a bother, but we actually got 

For data entry, we used an inexpensive, off the shelf software called Powerbase. It has a great func- tionkey for repeating duplicate fields in records, and it was small enough to fit on a single diskette and still leave half the diskette open for data. 

Over the past six months, The Hartford Cour- ant's environmental reporter, Dan Jones, and I have produced several front page stories and a bunch of others by using TRI. At this point, I think we've just arted to appreciate the possibilities. 

the state had underestimated emissions in its annual reports. We also found many shortcomings in how the state cracked-down on some manufacturers. 

Over the past few monts, we've matched the database with another state database on pollution from sewer treatment plants, use our database for daily stories and for a longer story on ozone eating chemi- cals, given information from it to many bureau report- ers, and used it to analyze transfers of chemicals to landfills and private disposal treatment companies. The state finally came out with its report this month and we immediately did a story on how it downplayed emissions by leaving out 14 million pounds of toxic chemicals shipped offsite by manufacturers. We in- tend to get the 1989 federal EPA tapes because it will have more detailed information that we didn't have time to type in. 

If you want to use TRI The 1988 federal 4-volume set is available through both the National Technical Information Service (703) 487-4848, and MICAR (314) 882-0684 1989 data is expected soon State-wide data is also available through NTIS at $50 per state. State en- vironmental protection agencies sometimes sell ab- breviated data on diskette 

Page 3


Plugging In Cont story - or download a single database - I think our program is going to be successful. Here's why: A visit here last year by Elliot Jaspin layed the groundwork. It created such enthusiasm throughout the reporting staff that databases and computers be- came a routine topic of discussion. There was no need to sell the program to the grunts. Elliot's enthusiasm caught the attention of several key editors. But, like other newsapapers, the Dallas Morning News has always had trouble match- 

"I am convinced that computer-assisted reporting is not just a program, but rather a research and reporting tech- nology that should be with us for a long time.... I have recommended a compre- hensive infusion of computer-assisted reporting into the heart of the newsroom " 

ing its computer capabilities with the needs of the staff. Management wanted an evaluation. I was the skeptic. And after a week at MICAR, my evaluation was simple: this stuff can work. 

But there is more to it than that. I am con- vinced that computer-assisted reporting is not just a program, but rather a research and reporting technol- ogy that should be with us for a long time. And to that end, I have recommended a comprehensive infusion of computer-assisted reporting into the heart of the newsroom using a two-pronged approach based on a $15,00 budget. 

The first is a centralized, research and mainte- nance function. Our newsroom library will be respon- sible for the logging and storage of the tapes, the maintenance of any large-scale databases and the research and development of new and useful com- puter-based tools. They were already doing that. This will be just one more (very powerful) tool. The library already had several computers: two large capacity 386s and a 486 on order. We have added a 1600/6250 tape drive, NineTrack Express and two copies of XDB. We are awaiting a 670 mb, 8mb RAM computer from a local "brewery." 

The secorid, and the hardest, is the creative reporting function. The enthusiasm is there, but the development of database skills throughout the newsroom is likely to be slow. We have decided to teach XDB through the development of small-scale computer-assisted reporting projects chosen very se- lectively. Reporters learn by doing - and such projects will give them both incentive and results. 

There have been problems. For instance, our newsrooms have been converting to MacIntosh based PCs. In light of what we have learned from MICAR, we have had to reevaluate that program. For many reasons, I favor an integration of Apple and IBM. 

But solving those problems has made our pro- gram more inclusive, and probably stronger in the bargain. We have pulled expertise from virtually every department to make things right. And when things go wrong, as surely we can expect, I think we can now expect widespread assistance and support. 

Starting, you know, can be such sweet sorrow. We'll keep you posted. 

Every other month, UPLINK asks an individual or organization that is just beginning to use computer- assisted reporting to share their problems and victo ries for Plugging In." If you have any advice or words of wisdom to share, please call us at MICAR 

This newsletter is a publication of the 



Missouri Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

120 Neff Hall University of Missouri Columbia, MO 65211 (314) 882-0684 

MICAR is interested in attaining any in- formation, ideas or stories related to com- puter-assisted reporting for future issues of UPLINK If you wish to contribute, please mail your story or idea to the above address. Or, call us for a fax number. - Adam Berliant, Editor 

Page 4
