UPLINK 

THE FORUM FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING 

vol 2. 

February, 1991 

# Plain Dealer's Overnight Success 

By Dave Davis Cleveland Plain Dealer 

tion Administration are not in their offices to look up the vital statistics on the aircraft for you. Then imagine that the next day is a holiday. 

Imagine this: it'searly Sunday morning, about 12:20 a.m., 40 minutes before the newspaper is put to bed, and a jetliner crashes at the airport. You hear it on the police scanner. 

Frantically, you call the rounds, the police dispatcher, the fire dispatcher, airport secu- rity. You manage to get a few details confirmed a DC9 cargo jet crashed during takeoff at Cleveland's Hopkins Interna- al Airport. The two crew members on-board were killed. You even get a few paragraphs onto the front page. 

But there's not another edition for nearly 24 hours, and the first full day you have to chase the story is a Sunday, a day of rest, a day when officials at the Federal Avia- 



That's the situation Plain Dealer reporters and editors found themselves in when an Emery Worldwide Airlines jet on February 17 became the first plane to crash in the history of Hopkins Air- port. 

By Monday, the day after the crash, we managed to print stories that included comments from the families of the victims - David M. Reay, a pilot who went to work for the cargo outfit just three weeks earlier after being laid off by USAir, and 28-year-old Rich- ard J. Duney Jr., the first offi- cer. We managed to publish eye-witness accounts that de- 

Overnight Continued on Page 2 

## Census Data Seminar News 

The Missouri Institute of Computer-Assisted Reporting and the U.S. Census Bureau are holding a conference for reporters on obtaining and using cen- sus data in early April. 

The one-day seminar will be held Monday, April 15, 1991 at the University of Missouri-Columbia. 

Speakers from the Census Bureau, MICAR and the University of Missouri, plus software and on-line sustems experts will discuss ways to obtain census ca. Featured are on-line systems, magnetic tapes as well as traditional paper records. Plus, ways to 

analyze census data, such as using mapping software, will be discussed. Panelists will also share informa- tion concerning how the media uses census data and notable demographic trends on the national, state and local levels. 

The cost of this conference is $30, transporta- tion, accommodations and meals not included. Atten- dance will be limited to 200. 

If you're interested in attending the seminar, please call Michele Ward at MICAR, (314) 882- 0684. 

Census Seminar Schedule appears on Page 4


Overnight Cont. scribed the jet taking off in a snow squall, rising briefly and then toppling into a fireball 2,500 feet from the end of the runway. The photographs showed the wreckage laying on its back. 

And by Monday, with the assistance from Adam Berliant and David Hinchman at the Missouri Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting, we man- aged to tell our readers that the aging DC9 had a recent history of parts defects and malfunctions that could have hindered the ability to operate safely. 

With the tail number that our reporter at the crash scene had gotten early Sunday, Adam and Dave searched the 75,391 FAA computer records of defects and malfunctions in commercial airplanes. Bingo! 

They found 32 of the so-called Service Diffi- culty Reports filed for the DC9 that crashed in Cleve- land, including one problem that received the FAA's worst severity rating, a "5." The FAA assigns a sever- ity level rating of "1" to "5" for the reported problems. 

The database coveres a two-year period end- ing on October 1990. While the records did not provide a complete picture of the aircraft, but they did provide a good one. 

For example, during a landing at Jacksonville on Nov. 28, 1989, the aircraft's landing gear malfunc- tioned. Said the report: "Upon gear extension, (the) flight crew heard a loud noise as the gear came down." 

CONTRIBUTE! This space should be 

yours 

After all, Uplink is supposed to be a forum for computer-assisted reporting. Tell us about your success stories, your defeats, your problems, your ideas, your insights anything! If it concerns com- puter-assisted reporting, it is material for Uplink. 

Send stories and ideas to: MICAR, 120 Neff Hall, University of Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, MO 65211. Or call us at (314) 882-0684. 

An investigation revealed that the right, main landing- gear rod end had separated from the wheel. The DC9 was ferried in for repairs and re- turned to service the report stated. The FAA reports detailed cracks and corro- sion in the aircraft's body structure. Some of the cracks measured five inches, while the corrosion was sometimes described as "very heavy." They told of parts that were loose, cracked, stripped or frozen in the plane's landing gear, warning systems and cabin and cargo doors. 

## Craft had history of problems 

Though the majority of reports did not detail life-threatening problems, they did tell of the wear and tear on an aging plane that had been in service since 1968. 

After the Sunday night analysis, Dave FAXed me about 30 pages of the most important information. It was detailed and clearly presented, so I had the confidence to put it in my story. 

I've since bought the FAA tape from the Insti- tute (at $37 I wish I had done so sooner) and I'm looking at other DC9s used by Emery to haul mail for the U.S. Post Office. I'm hoping that the results will make for an even better piece. 

My advice: Don't wait for a plane crash to get the FAA tape. It will be too late. And feel free to call me at the Plain Dealer if you have any questions, (216) 344-4808. 

The FAA service difficulty records are continually updated by the Administration New updated copies are availible through Myriad Systems, 3750 N 144, Oklahoma City, OK 73112 (405) 946-3395. Copies are also availible through MICAR. 

Page 2


# Blaming the Bug, Computer Negligence 

Lisa Touye 

original contract. 

"If there is an error caused by the computer, and whoever developed the program or machinery was negligent in developing that, they should be held liable for someone who is injured," Fossett said. 

Your database management software omits data and gives you the wrong information for your story. But it's not until you start receiving angry phone calls that you learn there's a bug in your software. What happens if one of the angry callers turns to the legal system? 

Who's to blame? You or the people who sup- posedly debugged the software? 

Reporters who rely too heavily on software are to blame - bug or no bug. But as the legal system evolves to account for our computerized society, there are some strategies you can take to defend yourself, even if the software has a disclaimer on its label. 

There is such a thing as computer negligence. If your söftware really is to blame, you might want to consult a lawyer. But here are some of the basics. 

It used to be that computer negligence cases fell specifically under contract law, but today, be- cause of the prevalence of computers in the workplace their use by people other than the buyer, computer negligence cases have fallen in the realm of tort law. 

What's the difference? 

"Say you have car insurance," said John Jay Fossett an attorney at Strauss and Troy in Covington, Ky., who has published journal articles concerning computer law. "That's a contract between you and your insurance company. You pay them money and they provide coverage for you." 

"If you're in your car and you run into some- body, well that's tort," Fossett said. "You've commit- ted a tort because if you acted negligently and should have been watching where you're going, you've committed a tort against the person you hit." 

Fossett said that as computers are used more in society, especially in manufacturing, more com- puter negligence cases will move toward tort law especially, in cases that involve physical injury. 

For example, if a glitch in a computer program causes hot molten steel to be poured on a mill worker stead of where it was supposed to be poured, the rker has recourse under tort law. The worker does not have recourse under contract law because he or she was not one of the members who drew up the 

Most of the computer negligence cases that have been decided under tort law so far have involved physical injury, not the loss of information, Fossett said. Loss of information would most likely come under contract law. 

Even though most cases have fallen under tort law, a case where a reporter has used faulty software would be a breach of contract between the reporter and the creator of the software he or she used. 

"Then you'd have to prove how you or your busi- ness was damaged because of the loss of information," Fossett said 

If the story causes damages to your organiza- tion, say you're sued for libel, you may then have a contract case against the software company. You will still pay damages for your libel case, but you may have recourse against the software company. 

Even disclaimers on software packaging can not prevent you from this kind of recourse Fossett said. 

Bug Continued on Page 4 

This newsletter is a publication of the 



Missouri Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 120 Neff Hall University of Missouri Columbia, MO 65211 (314) 882-0684 

MICAR is interested in attaining any in- formation, ideas or stories related to com- puter-assisted reporting for future issues of UPLINK If you wish to contribute, please mail your story or idea to the above address. Or, call us for a fax number. - Adam Berliant, Editor 

Page 3




Census Bureau Media
Seminar Schedule:	- Cendata Representative
3:00 - 3:30 Breakout Sessions
8:30 - 9:00 Registration
9.00 - 9:15 Welcome	Q & A Session on media uses of census data:
14 Dean Mills, Dean of MU School of Journalism	Byron Scott, Ray Bancroft and Bill Elder
- Marvin Postma, Director of Census Bureau Re-
On-Line Demonstration
gional Office, Kansas City
-Elliot Jaspin,
9:15-10:15 How the Media Uses Census Data	- Cendata Representative
- Ray Bancroft, PIO for the Census Bureau, Wash-
ington, DC	Mapping demonstration
> Byron Scott, Chairman of the Editorial Dept., MU	John Kavaliunas, Tiger Mapping System
School of Journalism	- Tod Everett, Strategic Mapping
- Bill Elder, Research Associate of the MU Office	- Tim Haithcoat, MU Dept. of Geography
of Social and Economic Data Analysis
3:30 > 3:45 Break
10:15 $ 10:30 Break	3:45 - 4:15 Tape Panel
10:30 - 11:15 Subject Content	- Elliot Jaspin, NineTrack Express
- John Kavaliunas, Chief of the User Training
- Tod Everett, Strategic Mapping
Branch, Census Bureau, Washington, DC
- John Kavaliunas, Census Bureau
1:15 - 12:00 Trends to Track
4:15- 4:45 Breakout Sessions
National Trends: Pete Bounpane, Asst. Director of
How census date is obtained and used
the Decennial Census, Washington, DC
- Emmett Morris, Census Bureau Regional Office,
State and Local Trends: Rex Campbell, MU Soci-	Kansas City
ology Dept.	- Ryan Burson, Cnesus Data Center, Public Law
Data File, MO
2:00 4 1:00 Census Products Availability and
CD-ROM demonstration
Support
- John Kavaliunas
- John Kavaliunas
- Marlys Davis, Census Data Center, Missouri
Tape Demonstration
1:00 $ 2:30 Lunch	- Elliot Jaspin, Tod Everett
2:30 - 3:00 On-line panel
- Elliot Jaspin, DATACORE, MU	4:45 Closing Session



## Bug Cont. 

someone - a breach of that duty. That breach must be the cause of injury, and that injury has to result in damages," Fossett said. "The hardest question to answer is duty," he said. "If some software you've used was not com- pletely debugged and you lose information by using it, part of the case depends on the effort that went into debugging the program. The programmers have a duty to create a product that is relatively safe." 

"They put in warranties and disclaimers," he said. "If I had a good case, I'd try to get around those limited disclaimers." 

But the disclaimers are carefully written, so 

recovery would be limited, he added. 

"For negligence you need to prove a duty to 

Claiming computer negligence is a tricky busi- ness. Do not expect that a bug in your software will relieve you from responsibility. 

Page 4
