O

November 1995

A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting


Uplink update 

Mining the tape 

It's beginning to look a lot like 

election season. 

Yes, we're getting closer to the New Hampshire presidential pri- maries. 

A January conference by IRE and NICAR will help you delve into campaign contributions, ana- lyze polls and dig deeper for stories. See Page 3 for more information. 

Meanwhile, this issue of Uplink is designed to help you cover what goes on in the office and factory. 

The stories look back at the semi- nal series by the Dayton Daily News, and jump to today, where reporters continue to mine the Occupational Health and Safety Administration's database. Journalists recount how to go beyond OSHA records, using court records, state worker's com- pensation data and more. 

By popular demand, this issue also recaptures highlights on the NICAR listserv, where reporters debated selling data directly to read- ers. And we include an update on the SEC, which may change its free Internet site popular with reporters. 

Inside Data debate Page 2 Beyond OSHA Page 4 EDGAR's fate 

Page 7 Bits, Bytes and Barks 

Page 8


OSHA falls flat 

## By Jo Craven NICAR Staff 

Hazardous working conditions can cost employees an arm and a leg - or worse. But until recently, the govern- ment put little value on the loss of life and limb. In 1986, Cleveland King and a co- worker were killed in Atlanta, Ga., when an unsupported concrete-block wall col- lapsed, crushing them both to death. The company was fined $2. That's right: a dollar a person. In 1989, four workers were injured in an explosion at the Phillips 66 Houston Chemical Complex in Pasadena, Texas. Two of the four died. The company was fined $720. In 1989, Richard Spencer was crushed to death by a forklift at Bethlehem Steel Corp. in Sparrows Point, Md. The com- pany was fined $585. These were among the many facts unearthed in Occupational Safety and Health Administration data by Mike Casey and Russell Carollo in a series that ran four years ago in the Dayton Daily News. This year, Virginia Baldwin Hick and Natalya Shulyakovskaya of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch found there are still good stories in OSHA records. Hick first used OSHA data in a spring St. Louis Post-Dispatch series that ex- amined local workplace falls that re- sulted in fatalities. 

## Tales in the tape 

"I cut my teeth in computer-assisted reporting by using OSHA data," Hick said. "OSHA had just put into place new 

regulations on fall protection. I featured how these regulations were supposed to save lives." 

In a Sept. 4 St. Louis Post-Dispatch story, Hick and Shulyakovskaya used OSHA data to document the organization's progress nationally in deterring workplace accidents. In 1991, after OSHA violations had peaked in 1990, Congress increased fines. Since Continued on page six 

Workplace inspections Short on surprises 

By Sarah Christian The Associated Press 

Three-quarters of U.S. work sites where serious accidents occurred in 1994 and early 1995 had never been inspected during this decade by the Occupational Safety and Health Ad- ministration. Together these accidents killed more than 1,800 workers and injured thousands more. This fall, AP studied the records of 778,000 inspections conducted by OSHA between Janu- ary 1989 and May 1995 and exam- ined the most serious accidents in 1994 through April 1995. The result- ing story, "OSHA Fails to Check Three Fourths of Places Where Work- ers Die," was released Sept. 5 and 6. 

Continued on page five 

Uplink 

On the NICAR-L listserv 

November 1995 Volume 7, Number 11 A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Editor Brant Houston jourjbh@muccmail.missouri.a Managing Editor Andrew Lehren andy@nicar.org Assistant Managing Editor Gwen Carleton 2618652@mizzoul.missou Senior Contributing Editors Richard Mullins Jennifer LaFleur jenster@aol.com Contributing Editor Rosemary Armao Staff Wendy Charron Jo Craven Drew Sullivan Wallace Winfrey Copy Editor Marilyn Joyce 

Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer- Assisted Reporting, P.O. Box 838 Columbia, MO 65205. (314) 882-0684. Subscription price is $35 (U.S.) annually, $50 outside the United States. Postmaster. Please send address changes to NICAR. Send e-mail to nicar@muccmailmissouri.edu. 

NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. NICAR services include hands- on newsroom training on computer-assisted reporting, special academic and advanced training in data analysis. NICAR is supported by a grant from The Freedom Forum intended to help the institute deliver its services nationwide to news organizations and associations. 

# Selling data to readers 

## By Naomi Aoki 

Columbia (Mo.) Missourian 

In the information age, information itself one of the hottest commodities. Selling information, of course, is nothing new. That is the business of journalism: But the question facing journalists today is whether to sell databases: databases of government records, made more accessible by journalists, or compiled by reporters. "There are lots of ways to meet our mission of giving people the information they need to survive in the world," said Steve Doig of the Miami Herald during a recent conversation on the NICAR-L listserv. "We should not be so narrowly focused that the only way to accom- plish that mission is on newsprint through a journalist's words." Doig argues that as long as the same stan- dards of accuracy and newsworthiness are applied to databases, selling them is no differ- ent from selling newspapers. He is not alone. Bob Warner at the Phila- delphia Daily News added, "If people want the information, we should try to make it avail- able, in formats convenient to them, for an amount that covers our out-of-pocket costs but does not exploit our readers." 

## Privacy questions 

Some fear selling databases will inspire a public outcry against invasion of privacy, fur- ther damage the media's credibility, and make it harder for reporters to get access to data. As it is, state government officials in one state after another are closing down access to driver's license records. 

Rich Gordon, also of the Miami Herald, believes people's privacy concerns must be weighed in every decision on what to publish. 

"It's pretty clear to me that the public would look badly at newspapers if they started selling driver's license records," Gordon said. 

For Gordon, the concern is more practical than philosophical. The potential backlash from the public-1 credibility and possibly even lost access to public records - would ulti- mately be self-defeating. 

Dan Browning of the St. Paul Pioneer Press agreed, adding that the impossibility of verifying the accuracy of some databases 

particularly sensitive ones like driver's licens records and criminal records - could hurt newspaper's credibility. 

## The profit motive 

Other reporters believe the profit motive woul compromise journalism. Currently, journalis are often charged less for databases than those other industries. But if news organizations begi profiting directly from government database some fear government officials will begin charg ing exorbitant prices for databases. 

"Pricing is a major concern here," said Ra Robinson of The Press in Atlantic City, N.J. "It being litigated right now. The last thing we shoul do is give state and local bureaucrats an openin to argue that we only want the data at cost so W can resell it for a healthy profit." 

Gregg Leslie, a staff attorney at the Reporter Committee for Freedom of the Press, adder "Reselling governmentdata-even value-adde data and even at break-even rates that subsidiz other operations - will not start us down slippery slope away from the public interest de fense; it will banish it." 

John Freed, database editor for the New Yo Times, countered, "There is a major danger th: agencies will start ratcheting up the price of dat: This will happen regardless of what we do as dat purchasers; if they decide there is a 'market we'll be tiny players compared with the insuranc companies, etc. We need to keep our eye on th ball - the information is public, paid for by ta money. Government is not a profit-making bus ness. What we do with the data is none of the business." 

"Public data is public data, and it should t sold for the cost of duplicating it," Doig sai emphasizing that questions about whether to se data are the same ethical questions journalis have been dealing with for years. "It's not different problem. It's the same problem." Naomi Aoki can be reached at (314) 886-034. or send e-mail to c646920@showme.missouri.edu 

## Data on the 'Net 

Among the news organizations that offer dat on the Internet are the Virginian Pilot at http: data.pilotonline.com and Detroit's WDIV-TV http://www.wdiv.com/index.htm 

2


IRE and NICAR sessions in January 

## Cover campaigns better 

investigative Reporters and Editors and the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Re- porting kick off the 1996 presidential election year with a weekend of comprehensive training in covering federal, state and local campaigns. From understanding polls and their flaws to tracing special interest money that flows into campaign warchests, this workshop will give you the basics and the nuances. 

The conference will be Jan. 20-21 at the University of Maryland in College Park. 

The program is scheduled to include: 

Training in using computers to analyze federal, state and local campaign finances. 
Talks by experts on how polls.succeed and fail. 
Tips on how to come up with investigative stories while doing the daily coverage. 
Saving all your hard work during the cam- paign to keep the winners honest afterwards. 
Call IRE at (314) 882-2042 for more infor- mation and a registration form. 

## Growing collection of federal databases 

## From the NICAR library 

NICAR offers a number of federal gov- ernment databases. Here is a list of our growing collection: 
Federal Election Commission contribu- tions data, including donations by individu- als and political action committees. 
Federal Aviation Administration data, including airplane maintenance work docu- mented in the service difficulty report, pilot licenses and grades, and aircraft registration. 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Actrecords, for tracking who gets loans and who gets turned down, and finding redlining patterns. 
Federal procurement data, 1992-1994, includes breakdowns by agency. 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms gun dealer records. 
National Bridge Inventory System data, includes inspection grades. 
FBI Uniform Crime Reports, a detailed compilation of crime data that includes sta- tistical breakdowns of individual murders. 
Social Security death records, by name and social security number, going back to 1937. 
Occupational Safety and Health Ad- ministration violation data includes worker accidents and exposures to hazardous chemi- cals by companies. 
U.S. Department of Transportation truck accident and census data. It includes acci- dents by company and road. 
U.S. Small Business Administration loan guarantees, 1989-1994. This includes the name of the business, address, amount covered by the SBA, and status, including whether the loan went bad. 
U.S. Small Business Administration disaster loan guarantees, 1989-1994. This includes individuals and businesses, the amount covered by the SBA, and the status, including whether the loan went bad. 
U.S. Small Business Administration's list of minority companies certified for SBA assistance in seeking federal contracts. It includes the name of the company, its ad- dress, the owner, type of business and phone number. 
U.S. Department of Education's Com- mon Core of Data runs from the 1987-1988 to the 1992-1993 school year. It includes data on school enrollments, finances, staff- ing and dropouts. 
U.S. Coast Guard directory of U.S. merchant vessels. It includes the name of the ship, the managing owner, home port and various descriptive information. 
U.S. Department of Transportation fa- tal roadway accidents, 1988-1993. 
National Endowment for the Arts, grants, 1989-1993. 
For up-to-date prices and more informa- tion, call (314) 882-0684, or send e-mail to nicar@muccmail.missouri.edu. 

Get computer training: 

The Medill School of Journalism, four-day computer-assisted reporting bootcamp, Dec. 7-10. Medill's Washington, D.C., campus. 
NICAR Bootcamps, week-long intensive training seminars, jan. 7-12, and March 10-15, Columbia, Mo. 
These dates are open to all journalists. For more information, call NICAR, (314) 882-0684, or send e-mail to nicar@ muccmail.missouri.edu. 

Missed Cleveland? To order tape recordings of CAR Rock '95 sessions, call Sound Images at (303) 649-1811. For handouts, call Investigative Reporters and Editors at (314) 882-2042. 

3


Other places to look for workplace data 

# Beyond OSHA 

University of Missouri 

For links to a variety of worker safety- related sites, visit corporate-sponsored http:// www.seton.com/ safety.html, Duke University's http:// 152.3.65.120/oem/, the Finnish http:// turva.me.tut.fi/ -tuusital/other.html, the Swedish http:// www.mic.ki.se/ Safety.html and OSHA's http:// www.osha.gov/ safelinks.html. 

For the newsletter Industrial Safety & Hygiene News go to http:// www.safetyonline.net/ ishn/ishn.htm 

## By Cassandra Sweet 

Paul Van Osdol of WJXT-TV in Jackson- ville, Fla., was reporting a story on an indus- trial accident last year, when he decided to research deaths investigated by the Occupa- tional Safety and Health Administration. 

Those inspections are required by law. With only an IBM-compatible 286 PC and a pro- gram called Nutshell, Van Osdol compiled information from death reports and OSHA investigative reports. 

Because state law prohibited him from ob- taining complete electronic versions of death reports, Van Osdol tracked down victims' fami- lies to get details. He accessed state vital statis- tics death records, probate court and circuit court records and GAO reports. Van Osdol's team also used the on-line resource, Data Times, to research companies where deaths occurred. 

Van Osdol found that OSHA investigated fewer than one-third of all workplace deaths in Florida during a three-yearperiod When OSHA did investigate, the average fine imposed was $2,900. After WJXT-TV's report, OSHA changed its procedures for investigating deaths involving longshoremen. The agency also promised to get tougher with companies that failed to report accidents. 

Dateline NBC's David Hinchman, then at KOMU-TV in Columbia, Mo., reviewed elec- tronic databases of OSHA inspections and Missouri workers compensation claims when doing a similar story on workplace fatalities. 

Hinchman compared electronic records from OSHA and Missouri's Division of Work- ers Compensation. OSHA documented only 39 percent of the workplace fatalities that fell into its jurisdiction. He also found repeated on- the-job injuries at one plant did not lead to changes in workplace conditions. 

## Using compensation records 

While reporting for the Houston Chronicle in 1993, Nancy Stancill acquired tapes from the Texas Worker's Compensation Commis- sion to examine 13,328 injuries to Texas teen- age workers from January 1989 to October 1992. Stancill discovered that Texas' child labor law, on the books since 1981, had never been enforced. Although required by law, the 

state had never actually hired inspectors to mon tor children's work conditions. And while the la sets 14 as the minimum working age, Stanci found some teen-agers who said they starte working when they were 10 years old. 

Stancill acquired names of businesses cited f violations from the Department of Labor. SI then analyzed all the data using EX IQ and four the majority of injured teens were hurt in resta rants and grocery stores. Injuries ranged fro sprains and cuts to amputations and deaths. SI also found many teen-age farm workers becan ill after being sprayed with pesticides. 

One thing veterans of workplace investig tions warn is that seemingly related informatic might not be stored in one place. Many gover ment documents are stored on different PCs amoi various public agencies. 

## Check other oversight agencies 

David Armstrong of the Boston Globe su gests reporters check local industrial accide boards or equivalent administrative agencies th resolve workers compensation claims. "They'r good resource for finding out why people a getting hurt on the job and what injured worke are getting in terms of compensation." 

Most states have an agency that handles clair independently, Armstrong said. These agencie accident records include workers' descriptions what happened, what kind of work they WE doing, how long they've been off the job and wl company they were working for. Information C be dug up including abuses of the system, peop filing multiple claims, people who win multip claims for the same kind of injuries at differe companies and other fraud. 

Other sources include labor unions, some which do studies on workplace issues, and st: governmental records on their own employe and how they get hurt. 

NICAR Director Brant Houston suggests tl if electronic accident, death or medical recol are not readily available, civil and circuit CO records can often fill in the information gap. M cities and counties have computerized litigati records and can copy records onto diskettes easy data analysis. 

Cassandra Sweet can be reached at (314) 449-9368 or send e-mail to :656776@showme.missouri.edu 

4


# OSHA inspections 

Continued from page one: 

Some of what AP found included: 

OSHA inspectors were not doing a large number of surprise inspections. These unan- nounced "program inspections" are supposed to convince businesses to follow safety regula- tions because OSHA staff could, in theory, show up at any time and slap fines and citations on companies that don't follow the rules. 
OSHA staff often spent its time chasing down union complaints, many of which re- sulted in no serious violations. 
OSHA inspectors spent nearly 106,000 hours in 1994 on complaint inspections that did not result in a single violation. 
Nationally, 54 percent of OSHA inspec- tions were surprise inspections during the pe- riod studied by AP. However, several states, "inundated with complaints that must be in- spected first, lag far behind the national aver- age," AP reported. 
Of the 6,411 workplaces AP concentrated on (those with recent fatal or catastrophic acci- dents), 75 percent had not been visited by OSHA in the previous five years. Seventy-six percent of those were non-union companies and more than half were small shops with fewer than 50 employees. 

## 225 miles away 

The story got started when a source inside OSHA tipped off AP Washington Bureau re- porter John Solomon and Special Assignment Editor Bob Port. 

"He said that if we looked at OSHA records we'd see that they weren't making surprise inspections," Port said. "The same source said if we looked at union vs. non-union businesses we'd see that unions were making a lot of unfounded complaints. Sure enough, that is exactly what we found." 

Port, in New York City, and Solomon, in Washington, D.C., worked in offices separated by about 225 miles. Although each made a visit to the other's office, mostly they shared data, query results and tables via modem. 

"Ifound it to be a fascinating tool. You have two people six hours apart by car who can zap these huge files back and forth to each other." Solomon said. "It worked really nice." 

Passing information electronically wasn'tthe hardest part of the story - it was the sheer size of the OSHA database. It includes millions of records and hundreds of fields. 

"We were working on a master table that was 300 megabytes large. It really taxes your ability to do queries," Solomon said. "It was not un- common to run a query that took two, three four hours to run. That's even with some fabulously fast computers." 

Port and Solomon used both FoxPro and Paradox to analyze the OSHA data, using each to its strength in different situations. 

"We did a lot of alternating. found that quite useful," Solomon said. "I like working with Paradox because it's visual. You can see what you're doing. But when you get into a real complex query, we used Fox for that." 

When they finished their analysis, Port and Solomon took the results to OSHA, where staff checked the numbers. 

"They came up with the exact same things," Port said. "They confirmed everything we had." 

## Right angle 

Although OSHA has been scrutinized by many news operations, AP's story came at the agency from a new angle, Solomon said. "Ithink the most famous one (OSHA angle) is, 'What is the cost of a life?' What we wanted to look at was, 'Is OSHA working effectively?' 'Does the prevention inspection work?" he said. "Well, we found it did work in places they get to. But do they do enough prevention? The answer is over- whelmingly no." 

While the AP story was reported and written, Congress debated OSHA's budget. It fit nicely into the debate, Solomon said. "I think both sides found powerful fodder in our story." Sarah Christian can be reached at (212) 621- 

7621, or send e-mail to schristi@ap.org 

For a handy site to check OSHA numbers, go to http:// www.osha.gov oshstats/index.htm/ This includes a searchable index to find the most common OSHA violations by industry. There is summary information on worker deaths, accident rates and other information that could help reporters on deadline put a workplace accident in context. http://gabby.osha- slc.gov/osha.html also offers OSHA resources. 

5


# Tale of OSHA tapes 

OSHA data includes four tables, which may be analyzed separately or joined using the activity number field, which appears in each. Here are the tables and some of the information they contain: Accidents: Names those injured, identifies the task that was being performed when the accident occurred, indicates whether a hazardous substance contributed to the accident, lists which body parts were injured, and indicates the degree of the injury, including whether it was fatal. Hazardous Substances: Lists accidents involving hazardous substances not involving people. OSHA: Gives company sites, previous violations, the number of workers employed at the site in the previous 12 months and other OSHA activity at the sites. Violations: Details penalties, types of violations and the number of employees exposed to the danger. -Jo Craven NICAR Staff 

## Continued from page one: 

then, accident and fatality rates have been declining. In addition, their analysis revealed, repeat and willful violations have dropped. 

But, as Hick and Shulyakovskaya reported, Congress is now considering a budget that would snip OSHA's inspection funds by one- third and sever its authority, which means companies would bear a greater responsibility for policing themselves. "That's like letting the gangs police them- selves," Carollo "They've already proved they won't do that. They have no incentive to punish themselves." Casey and Carollo examined OSHA's op- eration nationwide, traveling to various states and interviewing more than 200 people, in addition to analyzing 1.8 million computer records. Their series precipitated 1991 legisla- tion that increased OSHA fines sevenfold and led to the tougher, and more effective, OSHA that is operating today. If Congress cuts OSHA, the trend in work- place injuries may, as Carollo alluded, soar again - but one thing is for sure: The tale will be told in the data. Or, as Casey and Carollo discovered, at least part of the story will be told in the data. The rest depends on thorough reporting. 

## Tips 

Here are some tips Carollo, Hick and Shulyakovskaya offer for handling OSHA data. 

Use ZIP codes. "Some companies had many, many locations," Carollo said. "If you used company names, like General Motors, you'd end up with a zillion hits. We used ZIP codes to identify locations." 
Look for deaths. "One of the more interest- ing queries is to look for citations that result from fatalities," Carollo said. "Once you've got those, you can get all the paperwork on it because somebody's dead. Then rank those in order of monetary fines." 
Find the survivors. "Look through the data field of fatalities, find the names and look up the survivors early on," Hick said. "It helped me focus my story and focus my interviews." 
Keep it simple. "It's a pretty complicated database," Carollo said. "Definitely make the queries simple." 
Look for what is NOT in the data. Casey and Carollo suspected that not all workplace 

deaths were recorded with OSHA. They con- firmed their suspicion by comparing the data with state medical examiners' reports in Oklahoma and Arkansas. "I picked states that had a coroner's office that had good records," Carollo said. 
Examine penalty fields carefully. "There are actually three different amounts of penalties tha you will see for each inspection," Shulyakovskaya said. "The first comes from the OSHA table; it': called 'total current penalties' and represents the initially assessed fine. Second is the 'current pen- alty reflecting changes and modifications,' which indicates the fine negotiated between the com- pany and OSHA. It appears in the violations table Third is the 'total penalty dollars remitted for the inspection, which is what was actually paid. This appears in the OSHA table. 
"Often, the difference is drastic," she said "There are two obvious reasons: Employees abate regulations or go into litigation." 
Look out for "deleted" records. "OSHA has habit of leaving records marked for deletion in the database with a flag," Shulyakovskaya "Look for the 'delete' field in the violations table where (existing) records are marked for deletion." 
Inspected or not? "We discovered that abou 4,000 records a year have no inspections," Hick said. The records are listed in the OSHA table, bu the companies have not been inspected. The lack of inspection which may result, for example because the business closed or because it refused entry to the OSHA inspector - is noted in the field referred to in the record layout as "Why-no inspec." While this may not alter overall trends not noting it may skew specific calculations. 
Take advantage of SIC codes. didn't ge into looking at OSHA for dangerous occupations because the occupation field is rarely filled in,' Hick said, "but standard industrial codes (SIC are listed. These are standard codes used through out federal government. SIC codes indicate how the industry is classified in the federal bureau- cracy. You can find out which types of industries have the most fatalities." 
Use clipping services. "You'll get clipping: from tiny, tiny weeklies that otherwise get ig nored. If you're doing a national project, there i: no better way to find anecdotes," Carollo said. "I might be a brief in some paper in South Dakota and you get this great material." 
Jo Craven can be reached at (314) 882-0684, or send e-mail to c655034@mizzoul.edu 

6


On the internet 

# SEC ponders EDGAR's fate 



## By Robert Anderson 

University of Missouri 

Although the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has put a key database of company financial documents on the Internet, the agency is hinting that free access to the database might come to an halt. Among the possibilities the SEC raises is privatization the database, known as EDGAR. "We want to throw the net as wide as we can" for suggestions about how to run EDGAR, said Mike Bartell, an official in the SEC's Office of Information Technology. He was referring to a 12-question survey that was placed on the SEC's web page (http:// www.sec.gov) and in the publication Commerce Business Daily on Oct. 9. The No. 1 question in the survey is: "Should all, or a portion of EDGAR be privatized?" Another question refers to the operation of EDGAR at the SEC's Web site: "Should the agency continue to maintain and operate this service or should this service be provided by the private sector either on the Internet or via some other means?" The questionnaire, called a request for infor- mation, had an original response deadline of Oct. 31 - but that has been extended to Nov. 30, according to the SEC. Bartell said the main reason for the extension is that "there's an awful lot of interest in this." But he declined to say what the volume of the response or what responders were suggesting. EDGAR, which stands for Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval system, was phased in by the SEC in 1993 for access to filings of public companies. Among the docu- ments is the 10-K, the annual financial report for a public company. Investors, journalists and the general public use 10-K's and other EDGAR documents to assess the financial well-being of companies. 



Malamud's	service	(http://
www.town.hall.org) had carried the EDGAR
documents on-line until Sept. 28, under a two-
year pilot program underwritten by the National
Science Foundation. The SEC took over control
of the EDGAR system on that date.
The pilot program also allowed Internet
Multicasting to carry full-text versions of patent
documents filed with the U.S. Patent and Trade-
mark Office. The funding for carrying that data-
base ended at the same time as funding EDGAR.
The Patent Office has promised to put up a free
on-line system of searchable-but not full-text
patent information by Nov. 9.
During the pilot program, persons exploring
EDGAR scrutinized an average of 17,000 docu-
ments per day, for a total of 3 million docu-
ments.
The SEC states that almost three-quarters of
the 15,580 publicly traded domestic companies
now use EDGAR to file their reports. Under a
U.S. Congressional mandate, the remainder of
the companies will file by May 1996.
Since 1985, the SEC also has given out
millions of dollars in contracts to such private
firms as LEXIS-NEXIS of Dayton, Ohio, which
packages raw EDGAR documents for resale.
Malamud has said that for-profit companies
tried to kill free on-line access to EDGAR when
the Internet Multicasting project ended and the
SEC took over the online service.
"Lobbyists for the Information Industry As-
sociation (IIA) have actively opposed this
project," said Malamud in a September state-
ment on the Internet Multicasting Web page. He
invited people to write SEC Chairman Arthur
Levitt with their complaints.
In an interview, Malamud praised the actions
of the SEC to keep the free online service.
"My feeling is that the database is on-line
with the SEC and it will be difficult to take astep
backward by removing it," he said. "However,
the SEC has an obligation to find out what
people and the industry think, hence the RFI."
The main SEC contracts for EDGAR expire
at the end of 1996. SEC officials have said they
may use responses from the questionnaire to put
together a request for proposals from companies
that want to take over the EDGAR system.
Robert Anderson can be reached at (314)
449-6714, or send e-mail to
Robert43@delphi.com



## Survey: 'No problem 

One of the key proponents for free access to EDGAR said he is not worried about the SEC's survey. 

"Actions speak louder than words," said Carl Malamud of the non-profit Internet Multicasting Service. "I think the on-line database is of more significance than an RFI (request informa- tion)." 

7


Visit NICAR at http:// www.reporter.org. Administered by NICAR's web master, Wallace Winfrey, the web site offers detailed information about NICAR's activities. This includes upcoming events, training seminars, the newsletter Uplink, and NICAR's database library. In addition, you can search the journalism resource center run by Investigative Reporters and Editors, at www.ire.org The web site also includes a menu for IRE and for the Hillman Project, which is developing a site for tips and resources for journalists around the world. 

# Bits, Bytes and Barks 

## Nation of Islam site defaced 

The Nation Of Islam's Internet home page was de- faced within two days after the Million Man March. 

A hacker electronically broke into the Internet site and peppered it with cyber-graffiti files. 

The page opened with its Netscape browser title changed to "The Bigots Of Islam HOmeb0y pAg3!@#." 

On the page itself, the opening read, "In the name of some goofy god that does not exist! @#.' The site contin- ued with previous welcome message of "As-Salaam Alaikum (Peace be unto you)," defaced by another set of parentheses: "(As if we really belive that)" (sic). 

A source at Object Oriented Information Systems (02IS), the Internet consulting company that runs Afrinet Central, home of the Nation of Islam page, said Nation of Islam staffers alerted 02IS to the break-in two days after the march. The source added that the company is working on its computer security to prevent future attacks. 

The Cambridge, Mass.-based company had taken Nation's Home Page off the Internet while it eliminated the hacker files. The site, which includes speeches by Minister Louis Farrakhan, resumed at the same address, http://www.afrinet.net/~islam/ Timothy K. Maloy, The Internet Newsroom, editors@DGS.dgsys.com 

## Bound for California 

Jennifer LaFleur, who has helped hundreds of journal- ists learn computer-assisted reporting, recently left as 

NICAR's training director. In late October, she started her new job as database editor for the San Jose Mercury News. She can be reached at (408) 920-5728. or send e-mail jenster@aol.com 

## Bound for Omaha 

Carol Napolitano, formerly computer-assisted report- ing coordinator at The Times in Munster, Ind., will be joining the Omaha World-Herald on Nov. 20. She will bring her CAR skills to the paper as a member of its newly created public affairs reporting team. 

## Swedish IRE begins listserv 

Swedish RErecently began MEDIA, a European listserv on journalism, investigative reporting and computer-as- sisted reporting. The list includes bilingual journalists able to help English-speaking reporters covering Europe. To subscribe, send e-mail to listserv@sokrates.mip.ki.se. If you have questions, send e-mail to Michel Bajuk, head of the Swedish IRE-secretariate, at bajuk@jmk.su.se 

## Join NICAR on the Internet 

Don't forget to keep up with NICAR on the Internet. Subscribe to our listserve and join in as reporters talk about how to do the job better. E-mail to LISTSERV@MIZZOU1.MISSOURIEDU. In the mes- sage, on the first line, write: subscribe NICAR-L your name. To join IRE on the Internet, the instructions are the same except, on first line, write: subscribe ire-1 your name. 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

100 Neff Hall

University of Missouri
 School of Journalism
 Columbia, MO 65211


NON-PROFIT ORG. U.S. POSTAGE PAID PERMIT NO. 309 COLUMBIA, MO. 65211 

8
