#12 795 

O

December 1995

A newsietter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting


## Uplink update 

This is the season when it is supposed to be better to give than to receive. 

This edition of Uplink is de- signed to help you look at those who work in the world of nonprofits. The stories include how to look at their financial records, where to go for IRS computerized records, and how to mine the Internet. 

Also inside is a schedule for the Campaign Coverage Workshop, de- signed to help reporters during the upcoming election season. The con- ference includes panels with top journalists, and hands-on training on how to use the computer to bet- ter cover candidates. The event is Jan. 20-21 at the University of Mary- land in College Park. 

In addition, Investigative Report- ers and Editors and the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Re- porting are making plans to begin a reporting institute in Mexico. The project is being financed by a grant from the McCormick Foundation. 

Inside 

Brave new laws Nonprofits on the 'Net Page 5 IRE politics schedule Page 6 Bits, Bytes and Barks 

Unraveling the mysteries of nonprofits' 990s 

Page 8


# Hitching a free ride 

Page 2


## By Jo Craven NICAR staff 

Can you say nonprofit, kids? The National Football League can. So can the Professional Golf Associa- tion. So can the National Rifle Associa- tion. And so can the Motion Picture Association of America, the folks who put on the lavish Academy Awards cer- emony each year. These are just a few of the wealthy organizations listed as non- profit by the Internal Revenue Service. U.S. News and World Report recently spent four months investigating so-called non-profit organizations. In stories pub- lished Oct. 2, reporters Penny Loeb, Edward Pound and Gary Cohen revealed that 1.1 million "non-profit" organiza- tions in the United States control $1.475 trillion is assets while claiming tax-ex- empt status. 

## Freebies 

That means they do not pay taxes on property. They do not pay taxes on in- come. They do not pay taxes on profits from capital gains, royalties, interest, dividends and rents from debt-free real estate. They get reduced postal rates. 

They do compete with for-profit en- terprises, which claim that their own tax dollars underwrite the products of their non-profit competitors. And they do get to keep a chunk of change that could otherwise benefit the U.S. Treasury and various municipalities and schools. 

Forexample, financially ailing Wash- ington, D.C., is home to 1,800 nonprofits. If those groups paid taxes on their land and buildings, Loeb reported, the dis- 

trict would collect nearly $94 million more each year. New York City, which recently cut $754 million from its school budget to balance the city budget, could collect an additional $524 million from nonprofits. Albany, N.Y., could collect $25 million more from taxing nonprofits. The cost to the U.S. Treasury is im- possible to calculate, the magazine con- cluded. 

Continued on page four 

Look at the fine print 

## Who profits at nonprofits 

Non-profits make a lot of prom- ises. Some promise to help the poor. They are not supposed to enrich their executives. They all face cer- tain rules if they run businesses on the side. U.S. News and World Report's Penny Loeb and the Philadelphia Inquirer's Neill Borowski have spent a lot of time examining nonprofits. Here are some of their tips: 

Check executive income. The Internal Revenue Codestipulates that nonprofit revenues should not be used to enrich executives. Yet, U.S. News and World Report found that the NFL paid Commissioner Paul Tagliabue $2.5 million in salary and gave him a $950,000 loan. 

Continued on page seven 

When agencies don't deliver records 

Uplink 

# Legal griefs 

December 1995 Volume 7, Number 12 A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Editor Brant Houston jourjbh@muccmail missouri edu Managing Editor Andrew Lehren andy@nicar.org Assistant Managing Editor Gwen Carleton wen@nicar.org Senior Contributing Editors Richard Mullins jourram@muccmail.missouri.edu Rosemary Armao Staff Wendy Charron Jo Craven Bryan Venable Wallace Winfrey Copy Editor Marilyn Joyce 

Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer- Assisted Reporting, P.O. Box 838 Columbia, MO 65205. (314) 882-0684. Subscription price is $35 (U.S.) annually, $50 outside the United States. Postmaster: Please send address changes to NICAR. Send e-mail to nicar@muccmail.missouri.edu 

NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. NICAR services include hands-on newsroom training on computer- assisted reporting, special academic and advanced training in data analysis. NICAR is supported by a grant from The Freedom Forum intended to help the institute deliver its services nationwide to news organizations and associations. 

## By Sig Splichal 

University of Miami Most laws governing public and media access to government records were written and tested in court when most records had four corners and fit neatly into file cabinets. 

Public record laws were designed and applied by courts-to strike a balance. On one side are government efficiency and personal privacy. On the other are the needs of the public and media for reasonable access. 

As governments shifted from paper to digi- tal record systems during the past three de- cades, many laws are no longer adequate to ensure access. Problems confronting the pub- lic and media fall into three categories based on what government records custodians can't do, won't do and shouldn't do. 

## Can't do 

Often records custodians have little train- ing, especially at the local level, or are not "computer persons." They don't understand requests or are unwilling to attempt to meet them. An oft-heard refrain: "But our comput- ers can't do that." Reporters lacking computer skills often contribute to the problem, not knowing where and how to obtain informa- tion, or what questions to ask. 

## Won't do 

In the paper era, records custodians were not required to gather information from differ- ent sources and put it together in a meaningful way. Records either existed or they didn't. But does information gleaned from a computer at a reporter's request constitute the "creation" of a new record? Is sorting a database akin to searching a file cabinet. Courts disagree among themselves. 

Should a custodian be required to create a computer program at government expense to extract information to meet a reporter's re- quest? Courts disagree among themselves. 

What about the format in which a computer record is released? Who should decide, the agency or the requester? Is it reasonable access when an agency decides to give a requester a computer database on hundreds of pages of printouts when the same could be provided- at much less cost to taxpayers, and in a much 

more usable form - on computer tape? Cour disagree among themselves. Finally, who should pay the cost of ensurir that government agencies use their computers provide public records? The agency or the T questers? Courts disagree among themselves. 

## Shouldn't do 

A more fundamental question deals with th very nature of computerized records and ho such records differ substantively from their pap counterparts. Government information about i dividuals used to be less threatening to privacy 

The U.S. Supreme Court, in the influenti 1989 opinion Justice Department vs. Reporte Committee for Freedom of the Press, lamente the demise of this so-called "practical obscurity The court, in reasoning that threatens to lim access to computerized records, suggested th public records gathered from many public sourc compiled in a central government database e: joyed a rejuvenated privacy interest. 

In other words, the way in which records a stored could become as important as their CO: tent. This reasoning has not been lost on recor custodians, who arguably could raise priva concerns to shield information that rightly b longs in the public domain. 

The potential dangers of computerized recor have not been lost on legislatures. Protectir individual privacy is attractive politically. Se eral states, in the wake of a federal anti-stalkin law, limited access to drivers license records. 

The computerization of government recor creates access problems on a number of level None has been resolved adequately to both faci tate access and ensure government efficiency ai privacy. Journalists must understand these issu if they are to maintain continued levels of acce and properly frame the issues in the ongoing leg and political debates. 

Ironically, there is a downside to the resoun ing success of journalists who have mined go ernment databases for stories rich in detail ai social and political relevance. As journalists b come more adept with computers, custodia likewise become more sophisticated at using COI puters and legal confusion over open recor laws to thwart access. 

Sig Splichal is assistant professor at Universit of Miami's School of Communication. 

2


IRE wins grant to start operation 

# Training Mexican reporters 

Investigative Reporters and Editors (IRE) recently won a $544,000 three-year grant from the Robert T. McCormick Tribune Foundation of Chicago to work with Mexican journalists in launching a Mexican Reporting Institute. 

The main objectives will be training Mexican reporters, broadcasters and editors in advanced reporting skills, especially computer-assisted acquisition and analysis of data; developing a cooperative network of journalists, and support- ing efforts to improve access to information. 

"The Mexican Reporting Institute could not have come at a better time," said Rossana Fuentes-Berain, an IRE member at Reforma in Mexico City. She will serve on the search com- mittee looking for leadership of the Institute and on the Institute Advisory Council. 

The Robert R. McCormick Tribune Founda- tion has assets of more than $700 million. One of the priorities of the foundation's journalism grants program is support of freedom of expres- sion in the Americas. 

## Growing collection of federal databases 

## From the NICAR library 

NICAR offers a number of federal gov- ernment databases. Here is a list of our growing collection: 

Federal Election Commission contribu- tions data, including donations by individu- als and political action committees. 
Federal Aviation Administration data, including airplane maintenance work docu- mented in the service difficulty report, pilot licenses and grades, and aircraft registration. 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Actrecords, for tracking who gets loans and who gets turned down, and finding redlining patterns. 
Federal procurement data, 1992-1994, includes breakdowns by agency. 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms gun dealer records. 
National Bridge Inventory System data, includes inspection grades. 
FBI Uniform Crime Reports, a detailed compilation of crime data that includes sta- tistical breakdowns of individual murders. This includes the new 1994 data. 
Social Security death records, by name and social security number, going back to 1937. 
Occupational Safety and Health Ad- ministration violation data includes worker accidents and exposures to hazardous chemi- cals by companies. 
U.S. Department of Transportation truck accident and census data. It includes acci- dents by company and road. 

U.S. Small Business Administration loan guarantees, 1989-1995. This includes the name of the business, address, amount covered by the SBA, and status, including whether the loan went bad. 
U.S. Small Business Administration disaster loan guarantees, 1989-1994. This includes individuals and businesses, the amount covered by the SBA, and the status, including whether the loan went bad. 
U.S. Small Business Administration's list of minority companies certified for SBA assistance in seeking federal contracts. It includes the name of the company, its ad- dress, the owner, type of business and phone number. 
NEW U.S. Department of Transportation hazardous materials accidents database, a collection of roadway, rail, air and water- way accidents from 1971 to 1995. 
NEW U.S. Department of Transportation fa- tal accident reporting system. It includes all roadway accidents from 1988 to 1994. 
U.S. Coast Guard directory of U.S. merchant vessels. It includes the name of the ship, the managing owner, home port and various descriptive information. NEW National Endowment for the Arts, grants, 1989-1993. 

For up-to-date prices and more informa- tion, call (314) 882-0684, or send e-mail to nicar@muccmail.missouri.edu. 

Get computer training: 
NICAR Bootcamps, week-long intensive training seminars, Jan. 7-12, March 10- 15, and May 19-24, Columbia, Mo. 
NICAR/Medill Broadcast Seminar, March 23-24, Chicago 
North Carolina 
Advanced Computer- Assisted Reporting Seminar, May 5-10, Chapel Hill, N.C. 

These dates are open to all journalists. For more information, call NICAR, (314) 882-0684, or send e-mail to nicar@ muccmail.missouri.edu. 

Missed Cleveland? To order tape recordings of CAR Rock '95 sessions, call Sound Images at (303) 649-1811. For handouts, call Investigative Reporters and Editors at (314) 882-2042. 

3


From page one: 

# Unraveling mysteries 

There are several ways to get into the IRS' builetin board, known as IRIS. You can dial direct with a modem. The phone number is (703) 321- 8020. Set your modem to no parity, 8 pits, I stop bit. The system runs at a 9600 baud rate. The terminal emulation should be set to ANSI. Set the duplex connection to full. If you see odd graphics, you can turn them off by typing this at a command line: 

You can also connect to IRIS via telnet and ftp. The telnet address is fedworld.gov. The ftp address is ftp.fedworld.gov. Indicate at the prompt that you want to hook into IRIS. The logon for the public is "anonymous." The password is your e- mail address. The IRS keeps the site running 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The systems operator is at (202) 874-0277. Once you're in the system, there are instructions on 

how to use it. 

In 1913, when income tax began, nonprofits were born. Since then, Loeb, Pound and Cohen reported, Congress has recognized 24 catego- ries of tax-exempt organizations, besides chari- ties. Covered are professional and trade groups that promote the welfare of their members, colleges, health-care providers, retirement funds, real-estate boards, credit unions, civic leagues, and more. 

## Inquirer's analysis 

Philadelphia Inquirerreporters Gilbert Gaul and Neill Borowski were the first reporters to analyze nonprofits as a whole sector. The re- sult was a seven-part series published in 1993, which became a book called "Free Ride." 

=a. 

Gaul and Borowski spent two years poring over federal budgets, tax returns and federal and state economic statistics. They went through 50 years of economic data to track the growth of nonprofits. And they examined 6,000 organizations picked from the IRS' master list of nonprofits. 

Their selections included the nation's larg- est nonprofits (those with revenues and assets valued at $10 million), those of regional inter- est to their readers and others, such as the NFL, that were "just plain interesting." 

## 'Grow your own' 

Gaul and Borowski gathered paper 990 forms, which nonprofits are required to file with the IRS, and built numerous spreadsheets and databases. 

"I call it 'grow your own," Borowski said. But, several years later, Loeb found the quickest way to get data is to download it from the IRS bulletin board. 

"It's free, but you have to dial it directly," Loeb said. "The IRS data is in seven files, one for each region of the country, and someone doing their own city can get their own region zipped in ascii." 

It took two to three hours to download one region, Loeb said. 

egory of nonprofit, their three chief interests - what they support," Loeb said. "I would say it's some of the cleannest data I have seen. The queries were very simple, sorting by category and adding up; summing total for assets and incomes." 

"It's very basic data: assets, their most recent year of income, name and address, cat- 

## Gathering 990s 

Like the Inquirer reporters, Loeb, Pound and Cohen also spent time collecting 990s from the nonprofits. They all found that getting that data can be a little tricky. 

"The rule is the nonprofits have to allow you to read the three most recent years of their 990s,' Borowski said. "They don'thave to make copie for you. They don't have to do anything but le you see them and copy them down." 

Both Loeb and Borowski said the best way t deal with this is to take blank 990 forms to th organizations you are interested in. 

"Simply take that copy in and fill out the for based on the way they filled it out," Borows said. Blank 990s can be obtained from the IR or from the IRS web site at http: www.ustreas.gov/treasury/bureaus/ir fwforms.html. You also need to download t Adobe Acrobat reader to open the forms. 

Borowski cautioned reporters to view COI pleted 990s skeptically. "You have to reali that some organizations clearly did not take 1 forms very seriously and weren't that careful the way they filed them," he said. "Each 99( a mystery, and you have to unravel it." 

But the result is worth the trouble. 

"Every tax exempt organization has a cos the taxpayer," Borowski said. "They are not benefiting the public; there is a cost involv You have to read the form with that in min 

Jo Craven can be reached at (314) 882-06 or send e-mail to c6.55034@mizzoul.ed 

Check out IRS web site 

The Internal Revenue Service can be fou thttp://www.ustreas.gov/treasury/bureaus/ irs.html 

4


On the Internet 

# Tracking nonprofits 

By Nora Paul and Andy Lehren The Internet offers a growing list that can help reporters background a non-profit organi- zation. Learn how to better read their financial reports. Tap into the trade press. See how they should be run. And, of course, you can find all kinds of nonprofits and foundations. 

## Be prepared 

Learn how to evaluate nonprofits. This site offers a good introduction on some of the finan- cial measures to evaluate. This includes a sec- tion on how to read a nonprofit's financial statement. Visithttp://www.human.com:80/inc/ lib/eval.html 

The National Charities Information Bureau wants to promote informed giving to charities. Part of that effort includes evaluations of more than 300 nonprofits. For instance, Accuracy in Media does not meet all standards. The group also outlines its standards to better help you evaluate a nonprofit. Go http://www.give.org/ 

Learn more about how nonprofits should run from the National Center for Nonprofit Boards. It offers advice on how boards of directors should work, sample job descriptions for chief executives, and case studies on running nonprofits. Visit gopher://ncnb.org:7002/1 

## Trade press offerings 

See how the trade press covers nonprofits. This list offers links to a variety of publications. There is The NonProfit Times, which recently profiled how nonprofits use databases to raise money. The Philanthropy News Digest, run by the Foundation Center, offers tidbits compiled from the nation's media, like how Minnesota nonprofits are worried about 3M's restructur- ing. Go to this link list at http://www.duke.edu/ ~ptavern/Pete.Philanthropic.html#Press 

One publication not on the above list is The Chronicle of Philanthropy. But you can sub- scribe to the magazine's listserv. It's a one-way conversation, where every two weeks the maga- zine sends you a summary of issues facing nonprofits. Subscribe by sending e-mail to chronicle-request@nonprofit.com. Write "sub- scribe chronicle " as your message. 

Chronicle editors also mail out a listing of forthcoming conferences, workshops, and other 

events. The publication cautions that the list is not a substitute for the paper version. Postings to the list are not allowed. 

## Links 

There's also a list that links to hundreds of nonprofits with web sites, from repertory the- laters to cat rescue groups to the Children's Defense Funds. Information at each of the sites differs. For example, the Children's Defense Fund has statistics, like "Each day in America and information on how much it costs to raise a child. City Harvest has videos about some of their rprojects, and Debt Counselors of America has information on scams to avoid. Go to http:/ /www.vive.com/www/virtual/all.htm 

The Meta-Index for Non-Profit Organiza- tions is among the most comprehensive Internet listings, broken down by categories, of resources by, for and about nonprofits. http:// www.duke.edu/~ptavern/Pete.meta-index.html 

Internet Resources for Non-profit Public Ser- vice Organizations offers an excellent compila- tion of links to discussion groups, public records, legislative acts and government agencies of in- terest those who run nonprofits. http:// asa.ugl.lib.umich.edu/chdocs/nonprofits/ nonprofits.html 

Philip A. Walker, an information systems manager for Emergency Food and Shelter Na- tional Board Program at United Way of America, runs a series of links to nonprofits. These include a variety of United Way sites. Go to http:// www.clark.net/pub/pwalker/home.html 

For health-related nonprofits, the University of Kentucky offers gopher://UKCC.uky.edu:70/ 1 menu % 0UKR200%21191/ HLTHMNTL.INFO 

Campaign Central's page on Political Ac- tion Committees, trade associations and nonprofits is at http://www.clark.net/ccentral/ nonprofs.htm 

Also available is the Contact Center, which does just what the name says. It lets you get in contact with a lot of nonprofits and foundations. Go to http://www.contact.org/ 

For a listing of toll-free phone numbers of non-profit organization, go to gopher:// woca7.nwoca.ohio.go 70/ 00gopher_root:%5b_other%5d_1800HELP 

"Have I Got A. Tip For You..." a guide to investigative reporting by Stanley Penn, is available from IRE for $5. Penn is a Pulitzer Prize- winning reporter who retired in 1990 from the Wall Street journal, IRE is also now selling guides to public records from BRB Publications Inc. The volumes include nationwide guides on where to find tax liens, bankruptcy records, and drivers license records. Prices vary. Call IRE for more information. 

Nora Paul of the Poynter Institute can be reached at (813) 821-9494, or send e-mail to npaul@poynter.org. 

Andy Lehren of NICAR can be reached at (314) 882- 0684, or send e-mail to andy@nicar.org. 

5


Workshop programs 

# Cover campaigns better 

To register for the Campaign Coverage Workshop, cail IRE at (314) 882-2042. The price for IRE or SPJ members is $96. The price for non- members is $136. The price for students who are not IRE members is $121. The price for international reporters who are not members is $151. For all those who are not members, the registration fee includes IRE membership. You may register by phone using a Visa or Master Card. The conference is at the Inn and Conference Center, University of Maryland, College Park, MD. Hotel rooms are available there. The rates are $74 for single occupancy, and $89 for double occupancy. Call the hotel at either (800) 727-8622 or (301) 985-7300. 

Get a jump start on the 1996 presidential election with a weekend of comprehensive training in covering federal, state and local campaigns. Investigative Reporters and Editors, the Na- tional Institute for Computer-Assisted Report- ing and the University of Maryland, with sup- port from Gannett News Service, are sponsors of the conference Jan. 20-21 at the University of Maryland in College Park. Here is the preliminary program: 

## Saturday, January 20: 

9-10 a.m. Plenary session and overview: Combining Issues Coverage, Candidate Profiles and the High-Tech Campaign Rosemary Armao, IRE Brant Houston, NICAR Chris Callahan, University of Maryland 10-11 a.m. On-line Campaign Coverage Lessons Nora Paul, Poynter Institute Bill Loving, Minneapolis Star-Tribune 11 a.m.-noon Michael Dickerson of the FEC tells how to get the data you need to cover campaigns Noon-1 p.m. Lunch with Gene Roberts, managing editor, New York Times 1-2 p.m. (Concurrent Sessions) A. Getting Through the Spin Gloria Borger or Steve Roberts, U.S. News & World Report Glenn Totten, political consultant Steve Geimann, SPJ president-elect B. Writing Issue Stories into a Must Read Jim Neff, Ohio State University Jill Abramson, Wall Street Journal 2-3 p.m. (Partly Concurrent Sessions) Developing Campaign ("Off-line") Sources John King, The Associated Press 2-4 p.m. Building your own Campaign Database David Morris, The Associated Press The Center for Responsive Politics 3-4 p.m. (Concurrent Sessions) A. Backgrounding and profiling candidates David Maraniss, Washington Post B. Polls and Focus Groups Evans Witt, The Associated Press 

Hands-on CAR sessions will run at 10-noon, 1- 3 p.m. and 3-5 p.m. While we've given each of these two-hour time slots, we expect them to run closer to 90 minutes, which will keep down inter- ference with lectures and workshops. 

9-10 a.m. (Concurrent Sessions) A. On-line Campaign Coverage Lessons Margot Williams, Washington Post Wendell Cochran, American University B. Dissection of TV Campaign Ads Todd Purdum, New York Times 10-11 a.m. Polls and Focus Groups Repeat Session Evans Witt, The Associated Press 10 a.m.-noon (Two Concurrent Sessions) A. Covering Virginia State Elections: Lise Olsen, Virginian-Pilot Peter Baker, Washington Post B. Covering Maryland State Elections: Frazier Smith, Baltimore Sun 11 a.m.-noon Stories from the Data Brooks Jackson, CNN Jonathan Salant, Congressional Quarterly Sara Fritz, Los Angeles Times Noon-1 p.m. Lunch with Doug Bailey, American Political Network Inc. 1-2 p.m. (Concurrent Sessions) A. Opposition Researchers B. Campaign Finance Dwight Morris, consultant Chris Schmitt, San Jose Mercury News Center for Public Integrity 2-4 p.m. What are the Big Issues that will make Head- lines in Campaign 96? Bob Schieffer, CBS Jack Germond, Baltimore Sun Lee Thornton, Howard University 4-5 p.m. What's Wrong with Campaign Coverage? Rem Reider and Carl Sessions Stepp, University of Maryland Hands-on CAR sessions will run at 10-noon, 1- 3 p.m. and 3-5 p.m. While we've given each of these two-hour time slots, we expect them to run closer to 90 minutes, which will keep down inter- ference with lectures and workshops. 

## Sunday, January 21 

6


Do instructors practice what they preach? 

# Baby, you can't drive my car 

## By Renita Coleman 

University of Missouri 

Here's a scary thought: Driving teachers ap- parently teach what they know. Dan Browning of the St. Paul Pioneer Press. found out what they know is nothing special. They drive as bad as the rest of us. 

Browning used several state drivers data- bases. In addition to the driving records from the general population which contained about 3.8 million records - Browning used driving records for the 400 or so public school and commercial driving instructors in Minnesota. 

"The public schools didn't have the data and the commercial school instructor data was on rolodex cards," he said. 

Browning got the paper records for all in- structors, and compiled them into a database. Some instructors worked at more than one school, so he checked for double entries. On his 486 with a gigabyte hard drive, he used FoxPro and Excel to cull through the data. 

Browning compared instructor violations against the general driving population. "We 

found they were slightly more likely to have two, three, or four tickets. It was not statistically significant, but we took it seriously because you expect driving instructors to be better drivers," he said. Also, driving teachers can't teach after a certain number of tickets a year. 

## Driving tips 

The Pioneer Press started looking into driv- ing instructors because an editor was curious after it turned out a child molester in the commu- nity had owned a driving school. 

For those considering such a story, Brown- ing suggested that reporters talk with driver education associations. 

He also recommended: "You can do the story with or without the driving records of everybody in the state you can just get them for the driving instructors. The computer file doesn't show warning letters, but the certified paper copy would." 

Renita Coleman can be reached at (314) 642-6765, or send e-mail to c673328@showme.missouri.edu 

## From page one: Who profits at nonprofits 

Lookfor disguised executive incomes. "You might be looking at one form for an administrator's salary, and it's, say, $90,000," Borowski said. "That's very low compared to the norm. Then, when you start to put together related organizations, you have to total up the salaries to give an overall umbrella salary." 

Examine political contributions. U.S. News and World Report found that the National Edu- cation Association, the nation's largest union with 2.2 million members and a nonprofit, takes in $200 million a year and has made $8.9 million in political contributions. 
Identify subsidiary companies. The Unre- lated Business Income Tax act of 1950 requires nonprofits to pay taxes on income from subsid- iary businesses unrelated to their tax-exempt mission. Loeb, Pound and Cohen reported that fewer than 5 percent of nonprofits reported unrelated business income. However, what is "unrelated" income is ill-defined. 

"Most people think of nonprofits as prima- rily getting donations from the public, but they get most of their revenue from operations," Borowski said. "You have to step back and say, 'Which of these operations are like businesses and are competing with for-profit business?" 

When examining hospitals, confirm indi- gent care. Hospitals qualify for tax exemption based on such care. Yet, U.S. News and World Report found that six hospitals examined did not spend significant percentages of gross in- come on indigent care. 

When examining educational institutions, also check out the Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System (IPEDS), a database from the U.S. Department of Education on the the nation's colleges. "It is a big database that comes out every year," Borowski said. "It is really rich in financial, enrollment and scholar- ship information." 

By Jo Craven 

Visit NICAR at http:// www.reporter.org. Administered by NICAR's web master, Wallace Winfrey, the web site offers detailed information about NICAR's activities. This includes upcoming events, training seminars, the newsletter Uplink, and NICAR's database library. In addition, you can search the journalism resource center run by Investigative Reporters and Editors, at www.ire.org The web site also includes a menu for IRE and for the Hillman Project, which is developing a site for tips and resources for journalists around the world. 

7


# Bits, Bytes and Barks 

## A new patent site with new problems 

The new U.S. Patent and Trademark Information site is much prettier than its Internet Multicasting Service predecessor, and it professes to include patents back to 1985 where IMS was limited to 1994 and 1995. The interface supports everything from simple point-and- click to full Boolean language searching by field, and is easy to use. 

One problem of the IMS site that shows up again here is that you may only search one year at a time. A warning: a quick search for inventors in Nashville (a search I performed often at the IMS site) turned up just 18 patents, much less than the 50-60 was used to experiencing. And the latest of those patents was from June. This could have been a bug in the system, which was still being worked on when Ilogged on (Nov. 13). But beware of assuming that any search is pulling up "all" patents on that subject in the given year. 

Heather Newman, The Tennessean; send e-mail to hnewman@tennessean.com 

## Chicago Sun-Times hires Schmid 

Jon Schmid recently left as database editor for the Raleigh News and Observer to join the Chicago Sun- Times in November as a reporter. 

## Down in El Paso 

The El Paso Times is seeking applicants for its systems editor position. The systems editor supervises all com- puter-related operations in the newsroom, including main- tenance, training, networking, hardware, software and 

upgrades for all computer systems including SII, AP LeafDesk, Macintosh and PCs. Serves as primary liaison between the newsroom and technical personnel. Advises management on the impact and potential of new technol- ogy in news gathering, news production and other news- room projects. Apply to: Don Flores, editor, El Paso Times, P.O. Box 20, El Paso, Texas, 79999, (915) 54 6149. For more jobs in the Gannett chain, visit the company's web site at http://www.gannett.com. 

## Cronkite school looking for professor 

The Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Tele- communication at Arizona State University is seeking applicants for a continuing full professor to occupy the Knight Chair in Journalism. The school seeks a working journalist who would play a leadership role in teaching students how to use electronic retrieval technology to better analyze and present news stories. Please contact them by Feb.1, for complete job description and require- ments. Direct inquiries to Dr. John Craft or Dr. Fran Matera, co-chairs of the search committee, at (602) 965- 5011, or e-mail your snail mailing address to: atfrm@asuvm.inre.asu.edu 

## Join NICAR on the Internet 

Don't forget to keep up with NICAR on the Internet. Subscribe to our listserve and join in as reporters talk about how to do the job better. E-mail to LISTSERV@MIZZOU1.MISSOURI.EDU. In the mes- sage, on the first line, write: subscribe NICAR-L your name. To join IRE on the Internet, the instructions are the same except, on first line, write: subscribe ire-1 your name. 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

100 Neff Hall


University of Missouri School of Journalism Columbia, MO 65211 

NON-PROFIT ORG. U.S. POSTAGE PAID PERMIT NO. 309 COLUMBIA, MO. 65211 

8
