O

May 1996

A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting


Winners use CAR 

## Uplink update 

We always push CAR for dead- line stories, beat reporting and spe- cial projects; now, we would like to highlight CAR reporters who have reaped the rewards: This is- sue of Uplink features the 1996 Pulitzer Prize winners and finalists who usedcomputer-assistedreport- ing to get their stories. 

We hear from Pat Stith, Joby Warrick and Melanie Sill of the Raleigh News & Observer, who won the Pulitzer for public service for "Boss Hog," a series detailing abuses by corporate pig farmers. We talk with reporters from California's Orange County Reg- ister, whose staff won the Pulitzer for investigative reporting. And we look at work by the Dayton Daily News, The Fort Lauderdale Sun- Sentinel and Kansas City Star, who all had Pulitzer finalist stories. 

Also, check out Tech Tips for helpful information on searching the Net, and On the Internet for a look at journalism awards and where you can find information on all types of honors and prizes. 

## Inside 

Car Trips Page 6 Road Shows Page 7 On the Internet Page 9 Bits, Bytes and Barks Page 12 

Pulitzer winner for public service 'Boss Hog' 

## By Anna Clark 

Missouri School of Journalism The (Raleigh) News & Observer's 1996 Pulitzer prize-winning public ser- vice series "Boss Hog" sparked a public debate on hog farming that continues more than a year after the series ran. 

Atapopulation of 8 million and grow- ing, hogs outnumber people in North Carolina. Pigs are taking over the economy where tobacco has left off, making North Carolina second only to Iowa in pig production. The economic boon to the state has not been without costs. 

Pigs can produce up to four times as much waste as humans, yet North Caro lina let waste disposal go largely un- regulated. Open lagoons, many of which have no clay liners to prevent seepage into the sandy soil, hold the waste until it can be sprayed as fertilizer on fields. 

## Sacred pig 

The News & Observer ran "Boss Hog," a five-part series from Feb. 19- Feb. 26, 1995, exposing the environ- mental, economic and political impact of the state's new sacred cow - make that sacred pig. Reporters Pat Stith and Joby Warrick brought to light research about hog waste's threat to the water quality. They pinpointed leaks and spills hitherto covered up. 

Stith and Warrick also showed the human side of the manure problem the stench. People living near hog farms find themselves sealing their houses, running to get into cars when they have to go out and still having the odor stick 

to their clothes throughout the day. Perhaps the most condemning aspect of the series was the direct link Stith and Warrick uncovered between politicians and big-time hog producers. Phone records tracked legislators' calls to the Murphy Family Farms on the day regu- lation bills were up for vote. "Boss Hog" spotlights Wendell H. Murphy's cozy relationship with Gov. Jim Hunt. Murphy 

Continued on page two 

Top prize for investigation Fertility fraud 

By Stan Dorsey NICAR Staff 

In a state where nearly 60 per- cent of all phone numbers are un- listed, reaching out and touching someone can be far more difficult than it sounds. 

This frustrating fact of life con- fronted the staff of the Orange County Register as it tried to piece together its 1996 PulitzerPrize-win- ning series on fraudulent egg trans- fers at the internationally renowned University of California-Irvine Cen- ter for Reproductive Health. 

A hospital employee tipped staff medical reporter Susan Kelleher that doctors at the center might be tak- ing eggs from their patients during fertility procedures and later trans- 

Continued on page ten 

1


Uplink May 1996 Volume 8, Number 5 A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Editor Brant Houston brant@nicar.org Managing Editor Jo Craven jo@nicar.org Assistant Managing Editor Andrew Lehren andy@nicar.org Senior Contributing Editors Richard Mullins richard @nicar.org Rosemary Armao journa@muccmail.missorri.edu Staff Wendy Charron Stan Dorsey Glaston Ford Neil Reisner Natalya Shulyakovskaya Bryan Venable Wallace Winfrey Copy Editor Marilyn Lehren 

# Pulitzer win hog heaven From page one: 

Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer- Assisted Reporting, P.O. Box 838 Columbia, MO 65205. (573) 882-0684. Subscription price is $35 (U.S.) annually, $50 outside the United States. Postmaster: Please send address changes to NICAR. Send e-mail to nicar@muccmail.missouri.edu 

NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. NICAR services include hands-on newsroom training on computer- assisted reporting, special academic and advanced training in data analysis. NICAR is supported by a grant from The Freedom Forum and other foundations intended to help the institute deliver its services nationwide to news organizations and associations. 

became the No. 1 hog producer in the country while a state legislator. 

## Pig in a poke 

The seven-month project began with a tip about a state-employed veterinarian accepting a hunting trip from Murphy Family Farms. The News & Observer asked for phone records of all long-distance calls placed by all state employees for the previous two years, al- though initially they were interested only in the records for one person. 

"Generally, it is easier to get much rather than little," Stith said of records requests. 

They waited six months for the database. The News & Observer has a strict records- request policy: "If we ask you for it, we're going to get it or sue," Stith said. 

In the end, the veterinarian story was a "throwaway, 'Stith said. It did not run as part of the series. The bigger story was in calls between government officials and Murphy Family Farms. The News & Observer calcu- lated an average of 50 calls a week over two years from state employees to the Murphy company and family, including calls from legislators and the governor's office. 

## Story goes whole hog 

"Boss Hog" developed from a story about one person abusing a system to a business story (corporate farms swallow independent farmers) to an environmental story (what are the big farms doing with all that waste?). It turned into a series with political, economic, environmental and human impact. The series received the attention of the N.C. General Assembly, which authorized the governor and legislative leaders to form a task force to investigate problems uncovered by the report. 

"We're shocked," Warrick said of the se- ries' impact. 

After the series ran, legislators who had wanted to push for regulations were emboldened to introduce a half dozen bills, Warrick said. Several major lagoon spills dur- ing the summer of 1995 highlighted the envi- ronmental risks "Boss Hog" had forewarned, and some regulatory bills passed. 

Between The News & Observer's coverage and the summer accidents, N.C. Gov. Hunthas 

begun cracking down on the industry's polluters, Warrick said. The blue-ribbon commission he helped appoint, of which the majority of members have financial interests in the hog industry, has come up with significant proposals for regula- tion. 

"Pressure has been such that they knew they had to do something," Warrick said. 

## Databases 

The News & Observer used the following resources: It's own database of political contri- butions, started in 1990, that now contains the records of 100,000 contributors and 250,000 contributions. 

A database of records of all long-distance calls from state officials for a two-year period, including more than 40 million records. 

The team used Nine Track Express with FoxPro and R&R Report Writer on a Zeos 486-66 PC. They had a Contech tape drive to download the tapes. 

## Online data 

For online data, the newspaper tapped: FEC data of campaign contributions. General Assembly public terminal with legis- lation on the hog industry. Lexis/Nexis and Information Resource Ser- vice Inc. (IRSC) to track property owners in Florida. AVCOMM BBS, an FAA database for air- craft and pilot information. LINC, a N.C. state government database with economic data on the hog industry's growth. Dun's Market Identifiers and Dun's Finan- cial Records Plus through Dialog for companies' financial and historical information. Disclosure/Spectrum Ownership through Dia- log for stockholder information. Insider Trading Monitor through Dialog for information on corporate insiders. Securities Exchange Commission through the Internet and Dialog. USDA through the Internet. Secretary of State and Limited Partnership databases from the state on N.C. companies. PhoneDi for phone numbers. Pat Stith and joby Warrick can be reached at (919) 829-4500, or send e-mail to pstith@nando.com or jwarrick@nando.com 

2


Pulitzer finalist for national reporting 

# "Military secrets' 

## By Rex W. Huppke 

Missouri School of Journalism Tailhook was just the tip of the iceberg. An eight-month investigation by Russell Carollo, Jeff Nesmith and Carol Hernandez of the Dayton (Ohio) Daily News revealed that the U.S. military has shielded hundreds of sex of- fenders within their ranks, including child mo- lesters. 

In a series that was a 1996 Pulitzer Prize finalist for national reporting, the reporters told readers about: 

Norman Michael Fletcher, who, as a Navy recruiter, was accused of sexually assaulting a 14-year-old girl. Fletcher received an honorable discharge from the Navy in lieu of a trial. He now helps oversee a home for unwed teen-age mothers. 
Cortney A. Riley, who was accused of raping a 16-year-old girl. A witness heard the girl screaming as she was assaulted, but a panel of Riley's Navy co-workers concluded that she "wanted sex." Six months later, Riley raped and choked a 15-year-old girl at gunpoint. 
Christopher Matthews, who was charged with two rapes. At trial time, the Navy claimed it could not "find" the first victim. Matthews' own attorney said this was instrumental in win- ning his client's acquittal. It took the Dayton reporters about 15 minutes to locate the "miss- ing" accuser using her Social Security number and a publicly available computer database. 

## Spotting the trend 

Carollo noticed the trend of military sex offenders while researching another series titled "Prisoners on Payroll," which showed that many imprisoned servicement collect paychecks while in jail. He next turned his attention to the sexual charges. 

Using FOIA requests, he obtained court mar- tial databases from the Navy and Air Force. The Army refused to cooperate. The Coast Guard did not have a database, so Carollo built his own from Coast Guard files. 

The reporters analyzed the data and found evidence of unusual judicial practices: 

Hundreds of military personnel charged with sex offenses managed to get around prosecution or criminal punishment. Numerous military sex offenders returned to civilian life with clean 

records because the military often allows sex offenders to resign rather than face prosecution. They also found that military members who were victims of sexual assault and spoke up were frequently ostracized or fired. And, they reported, the military often refused to report criminal records to the FBI, as required. 

The series, which ran in October 1995, got results. 

U.S. Rep. Robert Dornan, R-Calif., requested that the Department of Defense investigate sev- eral issues the series uncovered. 

A 1992 case in which two Navy sailors allegedly sexually assaulted a 14-year-old girl in Alaska was reopened by a civilian prosecutor in Sitka, Alaska. 

The Dayton Daily News filed a federal law- suit against the Army after it refused to provide records of public courts-martial. The Army wound up giving Carollo most of the informa- tion. 

Carollo said Paradox was used almost exclu- sively for the data analysis. 

The Air Force data was very detailed and clean, Carollo said. The Navy database, on the other hand, contained many discrepancies. For example, "Memphis Naval Base" was abbrevi- ated more than 15 different ways. 

Another problem Carollo encountered with the Navy information was that defendants' names were not given. The locations of the trials, however, were in the database. The reporters managed to contact the civilian attorneys who had been involved in the various cases and were thus able to obtain the defendants' names. 

Looking back, Carollo would recommend several tips for someone trying to deal with obtaining military information. 

"The most important thing is to file your FOI way in advance," he said. "Give yourself four to six months." He also suggests starting off con- fidently and asking for the right people - the computer technicians. 

"Assume there is a computer database that you're looking for," Carollo said. "Find the person who operates that system. If you deal with public affairs, you are just putting another layer in an already bureaucratic system." Russell Carollo can be reached at (513) 225- 

2000, or send e-mail to russell_carollo@dni.com 

Read "Boss Hog" for yourself. The News & Observer's definitive work on how massive high-tech hog farms are polluting the air and water in North Carolina is available from the IRE Resource Center. The 115-page series costs $20 including shipping. Call the Resource Center at (573) 882- 3364 and ask for Item No. 12688. 

You can obtain copies of the Dayton Daily Daily News' "Military Secrets" from the IRE Resource Center. The series costs $5. Call the Resource Center at (573) 882- 3364 and ask for Item No. 12570. 

3


Pulitzer finalist for explanatory journalism 

# 'Divided We Sprawl' 

"Divided We Sprawl," the Kansas City Star's six-part series examining the causes and effects of urban sprawi is available from the IRE Resource Center. The series is 39 pages and costs $10 including shipping. Call the Resource Center at (573) 882- 3364 and ask for Item No. 13004. 



## By Glaston Ford NICAR staff 

Your home may not be the inflation-beating investment it is sold to be. Ask Marvin Blevins. In 1981 he bought his three-bedroom ranch house in a suburb of Kansas City for $62,550. If the value of the home had kept up with the rising cost of living, it would have sold for more than $103,000. He sold it last fall for $73,000. 

In the Kansas City metro area, the housing values in more than half the census tracts did not keep up with inflation between 1980 and. 1990. So, even though the cost of homes in these tracts might have increased, the real value of the home declined. 

That is one of the key discoveries of Kansas reporters Chris Lester, Jeffrey Spivak and Greg Reeves in their six-part series exam- ining the cost and character of sprawl. The series, "Divided We Sprawl," ran Dec. 17-22, 1995. It was a 1996 Pulitzer finalist for explanatory journalism. 

## Start your engines 

From the beginning, Lester knew the project would require a lot of number crunching. "The computer work was the key to analyz- ing white flight and income flight," said Reeves. He found that Kansas City lenders reject applications from blacks 2.5 more times than they do from whites. Even high-income blacks are rejected more than low-income whites. 

They also wanted to come up with a way to measure the cost of sprawl. Many people leave the urban core for a promise of a better life in the suburbs. This spread creates a maze of government, from school districts, sewer dis- tricts, library districts, to cities and counties. The cost is staggering. 

A computer analysis of the 1987 Census of Government Finance Statistics found that Kan- sas City ranked third in the nation in govern- mental units per person. The total regional cost is $3 billion with an average annual cost per household of $5,000. 

Another question they had was, "What is the pattern of housing value in the entire met- ropolitan area between 1980 and 1990?" 

Reeves massaged the numbers. Then Lester and Spivak used the results to stimulate their investigation. 

They analyzed every census tract in metropoli- tan Kansas City and looked at median housing values in each tract from 1980 to 1990.. The increase seemed small, so they decided to check it against inflation. The results were surprising: Many homes lost value, even in wealthier sub- urbs. 

## The Golden Rainbow 

Lester discovered some research done in Ohio that suggested people who make money on their homes tend to purchase homes farther from the urban core. The tax code encourages this behav- ior. 

If a homeowner makes a profit, he can avoid paying a capital gains tax by buying homes of equal or greater value. These homes tend to be in the suburbs. "That got us all agitated about the codification of sprawl in the tax code," Lester said. 

He wanted to see what was happening in Kansas City. 

Reeves used Atlas GIS to map housing values in the metro area. He then calculated the average housing value of owner-occupied units within a two-mile radius of the downtown intersection of 12th and Main. Then, he determined the average value for the nextring and the tring, and so on. 

Average housing values increased incremen- tally until peaking in a ring 14 to 16 miles from downtown - the golden rainbow. 

He did the same analysis using census figures from previous years and discovered the golden rainbow of peak property values had been creep- ing away from downtown about two miles a decade. This figure became one of the measures of sprawl in the story. 

Cities tend to grow in directions, not circles. So they picked the quadrant with the greatest wealth, Johnson County, and used that figure in the series. 

Lester and Spivak used the computer results, together with interviews with more than 700 sources, to try to explain sprawl. It wasn't easy. 

"This wasn't about investigating one public official who did something wrong and sending them to jail," Lester said. "This is about trying to explain in some rational way why American soci- ety came out the way it did over the last 50 years." 

The reporting team got the 1980 and 1990 Census housing tables online. They typed in the 

Continued on page eleven 

4.


Pulitzer finalist for beat reporting 

# 'Medicaid HMO Game' 

By Dawn Hobbs IRE staff Doctor, doctor give me the news; I got a bad case of - cheating the taxpayers. 

A Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel investiga- tion revealed that HMOs designed to provide cost-cutting health care for the poor often fail to deliver services the state paid them to provide. 

The investigation also indicated that while patients may suffer, some Medicaid HMO ex- ecutives live lavishly off the taxpayers leas- ing luxury cars and awarding themselves gener- ous salaries or service contracts. 

"The Medicaid HMO Game: Poor Care, Big Profits" is the Sun-Sentinel's fourth investiga- tive series exposing quality problems in tax- funded Florida HMOs. The series, by Fred Schulte and Jenni Bergal, was a 1996 Pulitzer finalist for beat reporting. It ran Nov. 26-29, 1995. The reporters began investigating HMOs in the early 1990s. 

## Contractors see green 

The investigation exposed physicians with histories of providing poor patient care, con- victed felons and trash collectors-all of whom had applied for HMO contracts or had already received them. The point is to sign up as many people as possible, Schulte explained, because the state pays the HMO contractor per person. 

"They were out signing people up under bridges and forging people's names on applica- tions," Schulte said. "In Miami, they'd drive up in a big van and unload a bunch of sales agents dressed up as nurses with white coats and stetho- scopes. They'd knock on people's doors and tell them about this wonderful program. When the people said they were already on Medicaid, the agents told them they must sign up or lose their Medicaid benefits." 

The enrollment fraud proved to be so outra- geous, that Schulte and Bergal investigated matters further. 

The team began collecting every sort of document available: the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration general correspon- dence files, HMO hospital and physician utili- zation data, disenrollment data, medical peer review reports, annual incident reports and griev- ance reports and administrative hearing judg- ments and final reports. 

None of these documents came in electronic form. And even worse, Schulte and Bergal found thousands of pages of medical peer review records and other reports sitting in boxes in a closet in the Tallahassee state offices. 

## Built to order 

After retrieving all the boxed data, Schulte and Bergal met with Jay Mendell, professor of public administration at Florida Atlantic Uni- versity in Ft. Lauderdale. Mendell, who has taught computer systems and the Internet to graduate students for 20 years, has provided technical support to Schulte and Bergal on sev- eral assignments. 

Mendell set up data templates with as much error rejection as possible in which Bergal then entered some 5,000 to 7,000 pages of peer re- views. As Easy As, shareware available through Trius, and File Express, another shareware put out by Expressware, were used for entering the data on an IBM clone. 

## Pick a program 

Once the data was entered, Mendell explained, it went into a program that best expressed the sults-sometimes Excel and sometimes SPSS. 

"Sometimes simple summary statistics and ratios will do the trick, and then you use Excel," Mendell said. "Other times, when the data is more complicated, you need to produce three- dimensional plots and look at them from differ- ent angles. This is when you use SPSS, a heavy- duty statistical program. 

As a result of this series, key Florida legisla- tors promised new laws to crack down on Med- icaid HMO abuses during the current session, rewrote contracts for Medicaid HMOs and banned door-to-door marketing. State officials also refused to license two HMOs whose ties to state Sen. Alberto Gutman were documented by the newspaper. The series disclosed that the senator had attempted to broker the sales of HMOs for fees as high as $1 million and had gone into the HMO business outside Florida with some health industry executives with busi- ness before his committee. Gutman has resigned from the health-care committee and faces state charges. 

Fred Schulte can be reached at (305) 356 4591, or send e-mail to freds@aol.com 

"The Medicaid HMO Game: Poor Care, Big Profits," the Fort Lauderdale Sun- Sentinel series examining HMO fraud, is available from the IRE Resource Center. The series is 227 pages and costs $30, including shipping. Call the Resource Center at (573) 882- 3364 and ask for Item No. 12940. 

5


CAR trips: First adventures 

# Debunking gas claims 

Looking for a roommate in for the IRE/NICAR National Conference June 13-16 in Providence? Then you might try posting to the newsgroup - ire.conference. roommates With your net.news- enabled web browser (most versions of Netscape) go to: news:// news.reporter.org/ ire.conference. roommates 

Questions or comments regarding this newsgroup should be directed to news- admin@reporter.org. 

## By Chris Heinbaugh 

KNXV-TV, Phoenix 

Chris Heinbaugh attended the NICAR Bootcamp in March. It sounded too crazy to be true. After all, it involved two huge firms, the Phoenix-based Circle K chain, and UNOCAL 76 Gasoline. In a well-publicized announcement, last year they announced that Circle K would now carry Unocal 76 gas in the pumps at its stores in Arizona and Nevada. It was followed by a major advertising blitz: full-page ads, bill- boards, TV, radio. But the News 15 investigative unit began getting calls from tanker drivers and Circle K employees, all saying the same thing: The gas at Circle K, wasn't coming from UNOCAL's terminals. We checked it out, following tanker trucks, and sure enough, the gasoline at Circle K, was coming from the same gas terminals it was using before the agreement. Nothing had changed, except now "76" was slapped on the pumps. 

## FoxPro is my friend 

But we wanted more proof. So I called the Arizona Department of Weights and Mea- sures, the agency responsible for testing qual- ity. An inspector there would not get specific, but dropped hints about inspections reports. He mentioned they were kept on a database. BOING! Having just returned from NICAR Bootcamp, I was salivating. He began brag- ging about this great FoxPro program. 

"FoxPro is my friend," he said. "Can I get a copy of your database?" "Sure," he said. "Just fax me an Open Records request." One fax and a diskette later, I had my database (easiest I've ever acquired), and I had the hard facts to back up my story. 

## The proof 

The database helped me verify what our insiders had been telling us. As part of the inspection, the stations must list which termi- nal the gas came from. This field not only proved the Circle K gas wasn't coming from UNOCAL, but because the records stretched back to well before the agreement, we could prove these were the same suppliers as before. 

Another field showed the elements. to oxygenate the fuel. UNOCAL only uses ethanol in Phoenix, but the gas at Circle K used MTBE as well as ethanol, clearly demonstrating a differ- ence. 

The database also helped us establish a serious difference in the quality control between real UNOCAL gas, and the stuff at Circle K. I ran queries pulling out all the violations inspectors handed UNOCAL and Circle K since January. UNOCAL only had three. Circle K had 33 more than any other chain. 

The database also helped debunk Circle K's claim that swapping gas is something everyone does. It showed that the gas at Chevron stations was coming only from Chevron terminals, Mobil from Mobil terminals, Unocal from Unocal. Circle K has lots of suppliers, and few got their gas from UNOCAL. The bottom line: The gas I buy at Circle K is not the same gas I would get at UNOCAL. 

## Loosening tongues 

Faced with this, state inspectors now felt quite free to spell out their concerns that consumers were being misled. And the state Attorney General's office made it clear, if the companies are saying it's UNOCAL gas, it better be UNOCAL, not something like UNOCAL, and the ads could be violating consumer protection laws. Circle K could not refute that it was different gas. They could only say that it met the standards set by UNOCAL. But even this didn't hold up be- cause the database showed the problems with quality control. 

## Data backbone 

The story was important to consumers, and might not have flown if it wasn't for the database. Circle K had brushed off concerns as no big deal, insisting the gas meets UNOCAL's standards. At least one of our print competitors reportedly shelved their story because they bought Circle K's explanation. We might have too if we hadn't found and used the database. While it was only one element our viewers saw in a colorful story, it provided backbone and gave the report the teeth it needed to stand in the face of some major corporate pressure to refute it. 

Chris Heinbaugh can be reached at (602) 232- 6314, or send e-mail to heinknxv@aol.com 

6


NICAR seminars 

# Taking the show on the road 

## By Brant Houston 

NICAR managing director Fifty-two. Count 'em. 52. That's how many seminars the National In- stitute for Computer-Assisted Reporting will give between Jan. 1, 1996, and June 30, 1996. 

In six months, NICAR instructors will have gone to more than 25 states to teach the rudi- ments of CAR to more than 1,000 print and broadcastjournalists The NICAR seminars last from one to six days, ranging from a CAR overview to intense hands-on work in statistics and mapping software. 

In the past few months, NICAR has con- ducted customized on-site seminars for 10 to 20 reporters and editors at Newsday, The Washing- ton Post, the TV magazine American Journal, Alabama Public TV and Money Magazine. 

The institute also held a special, first-ever seminar for 25 broadcast journalists in March at Northwestern University and a week-long ad- vanced seminar in statistics and mapping at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill with precision journalism guru Philip Meyer. 

At the same time, NICAR has trained jour- nalists from smaller news organizations on the needs of minority journalists. In a joint effort with the Associated Press, NICAR will give at least 16 regional seminars in six months, with several more planned. Journalists from papers such as Paducah Sun and Kalamazoo Gazette 

have been able to afford the low fees and con- venience of these regional, two-day meetings. 

## Minority fellowships 

Minority journalists have been offered fel- lowships to the week-long bootcamps at the University of Missouri in Columbia. In the fall, NICAR will hold three two-day regional semi- nars for minority journalists. NICAR hopes to hold the seminars in Richmond, Va.; Dallas, Texas; and San Francisco, Calif. NICAR also has teamed up with the Multicultural Manage- ment Program at the Missouri School of Jour- nalism to hold a week-long seminar for minority managers dealing with the new technology. 

NICAR also plans to give presentations and sample training at the national conventions of the associations of Hispanic, Black, and Asian American journalists. 

NICAR's basic curriculum covers practical use of the Internet (not to surf but to produce stories), spreadsheets, and database managers the three basic tools of CAR. NICAR instruc- tors can also teach mapping, data managing and statistics. 

Providing a backbone of instruction are exer- cises created by practicing journalists and the NICAR staff, the handbook "Computer-Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide" and two books of synopses of CAR stories, and a collection of videotapes. 

## Post praises ambassadors' 

"Ambassadors to the newsroom" is what Washington Post executive editor Leonard Downie Jr. called the journalists at the NICAR seminar at the Post this spring. In a brief talk with the 10 seminar partici- pants, Downie said he expected them to take their new knowledge back to the newsroom and lead the way on computer-assisted reporting. Downie said he wanted computer-assisted reporting to become a routine occurrence in the Post newsroom, saying that it could be used for deadlinestories, on-the-beat stories and projects. The Post invited NICAR to teach three days of a five-day seminar put together by Post CAR experts and trainers. William Casey, who heads CAR at the Post, led the first day of training on 

the Internet and spreadsheets. NICAR trainers then appeared on the second day and spent three days on spreadsheets, database managers, data acquisition and data cleaning. On the fifth day, Casey finished the seminar. 

Casey said the training journalists received before NICAR's arrival made the seminar ex- tremely productive. Trainers at the Los Angeles Times, the Boston Globe, and Newsday have also found that kind of preparation helpful. 

Diane Weeks, manager of computer training for the newsroom, said the seminar worked "really well" and plans are underway for Post trainers to spread the CAR word further. 

Brant Houston 

Miss something? Check out the IRE-L and NICAR-L mailing list archives on our websites at http:// www.ire.org and http://www.nicar.org. You can see posts to both lists organized by thread, author and date. The list archives are available in html or in plain text format, which is useful for downloading a particular month. 

7


# Tech tips: A guide to search engines Seek and ye shall find 

"The News & Observer School for Computer- Assisted Reporting" is the name of a handout created by Pulitzer winner Pat Stith. It outlines the schedule used to train the News & Observer staff to use computers in their day-to-day reporting. It includes examples of CAR stories done by the N&O including feature, business, political, spot news & investigative stories. The handout is 17 pages and costs $5 including shipping. Call (573) 882-3364. 

By Dan Keating Miami Herald 

A typical area of confusion for new online users especially reporters - is searching. People hear about "search engines" and in- dexes, but seldom recognize the important differences between them, and when to use the different things. Here's a guide: 

## What's out there? 

Indexes - They work by general de- scriptions of content. There are indexes, largely of World Wide Web sites. Yahoo and Galaxy are well organized to quickly get to the kind of information you want. They are comprehen- sive of major Web sites. 

The owner of a Web site has to "register" with the indexes, so they are for finding sites to which someone would want to draw attention. They tend to be sites of major educational, government, organization and commercial in- terests. They are organized based on the gen- eral topic of their content. So if a site is about movies, it 11 be organized there. The Web site may or may not have a section about Marilyn Monroe. All you know is that it has movies. 

You find sites by checking the general descriptions. You can also search the index itself, so you can look quickly for a particular business name. But you are searching only the name of the link and description of the link, not the content of what's on the link. Links will almostalways bring you to the main homepage for a site. You will also find pointers to some discussion groups and a handful of listservs. 

Yahoo! http://www.yahoo.com Galaxy http://galaxy.einet.net 

Internet Search Engines - They look at the exact content of each: There are "search engines" for searching the content of all the Web pages on the Internet. Obviously, it would be impractical for them to scan the entire network after you put in your request. They work by sending out "robot" programs that automatically read every page of every Web site they can find (there are things administra- tors can do to prevent pages from being read). They then index every word on every site. 

So, the search engines have a giant database listing words and where they were found. When you search, it looks in the database and brings back the matching sites. 

Unlike an index, you're not just searching for words in the title or description of a site; you're actually searching the contents of every page on a site. And you might get linked to a page deep within a Web site, rather than just the front page. For instance, if you searched for "Marilyn Mon- roe" you might get a link to a reference to her on a page with an address such as "http:// www.moviespot.com/classics/comedy/some- like-it-hot/stars/mm.html". That is extremely use- ful for getting exactly to what you want. But you won't be at the "welcome" screen for that Web site, so you might have trouble figuring out where you are. 

Also, you are likely to find a lot of obscure things when you search here, since just one refer- ence on a page somewhere might match your search, even if the general contents of the Web site at that link aren't of interest. 

So, when you search these Net-wide engines, you tend to get a huge number of responses and may get buried in them. Lycos http://www.lycos.com WebCrawler http://www.webcrawler.com ItaVista http://altavista.digital.com (my favorite) 

Usenet Discussion Group earch-Search- ing online conversation. The indexes and search engines generally point you at sites where infor- mation has been posted. 

But there's a lot of discussion online, too. You can search the content of the discussion on 10,000 usenet groups. If you search for a common term, such as "Microsoft," you'll get buried. But if you're trying to find an expert on some obscure topic, such as "hermaphroditic mammalian albi- nos," the discussions are probably your best chance. 

You can find out who's talking about some- thing and what they're saying. DejaNews http://www.dejanews.com AltaVista http://altavista.digital.com 

## What do I use? 

If you're looking for a specific site online that is not obscure and whose creators would want it to be found, then you are best off at the indexes. 

If you are looking for the various sites on a general topic, the indexes are by far the best choice. So, if you want to find all the sites online about classical music or computer-assisted de- 

Continued on page nine 

8


On the Internet 

# Awards, honors and prizes 



By Nora Paul 

The Poynter Institute 

Yes, of course, we write and produce great 

journalism for the benefit of our readers and 

viewers. But it sure is nice when those stories 

win prizes. 

This issue's Web column focuses on journal- ism awards and on where you can find informa- tion on types of honors and prizes. Check out the sites with the winning entries available and learn about great newswriting from the best in the industry. 

for this is the site for information on 

prize and information about how to submit an 

The prize winning photos and cartoons are 

the individual prize announcement pages. The 

able on the site in June. 

http://www.inform.umd.edu:8080/News/AJR/ 

Information about a variety of journalism 

Review's annual special advertising section. 

the Year Contest: http://www.missouri.edu/ 

## Continued from page eight: Tech tips: Searching 

Pictures of the Year is one of the world's oldest and largest photojournalism competi- tions. This site shows the annual winners and information about the judges and judging of the award. RTNDA/Radio and Television News Direc- tors Association: http://www.rtnda.org/rtnda/ awards.html This comprehensive listing of major elec- tronic journalism awards, grants and fellow- ships provides information on more than 70 awards or programs for journalists. American Association for the Advancement of Science: Science JournalismAwards: http:// www.aaas.org/communications/awards.htm This award for excellence in science journal- ism (print or broadcast) is sponsored by the Whitaker Foundation. The site tells about about applying and links to the 1995 winners. APME (Associated Press Managing Editors) Awards: http://www.apme.com/apmewin.htm This listing of APME awards links to a page with information about the winners and final- ists. Entire winning entries are available. SND (Society for Newspaper Design) Awards: http://www.medill.nwu.edu/snd/con- test17/winners.html This is a listing of awards for excellence in newspaper design. Nora Paul can be reached at (813) 821-9494, or send e-mail to npaul@poynter.org 

sign or reproductive rights, you'll almost cer- tainly heading on that subject in the index. You'll find the related sites. If you are looking for something that isn't major and whose creator wouldn't register it with the indexes, then try the search engines. Don't do this with general subjects, such as Microsoft or engineering or classical music. But it would be good if you were looking for a page about Seji Ozawa or Arctic seals. Only use the search engines for things that are specific enough and obscure enough that you won't get buried. Sometimes they are use- ful in searching for combinations of things, such as "wolf and Yellowstone." You probably won't find a Web site under 

## -photowww/poy/index.html 

The Pulitzer Prize web site: http:// 

www.pulitzer.org/ 

Produced by Columbia University's Center 

currentandpastPulitzer winners,ahistory of the 

entry for consideration. 

available, click on exhibits button at the end of 

entire set of winning contributions will be avail- 

The AJR's awards, grants and scholarships 

awards.html 

awards, part of the American Journalism 

NPPA University of Missouri Pictures of 

that definition in an index, but there's a good chance of finding a page with those words on them somewhere on the Web. If you are mainly interested in finding an expert or the subject is even too obscure for the search engines, try searching the usenet discus- sion groups. Searching the discussion groups is also useful for finding more current topics, since it generally takes a while for information to get posted into Web sites. In general, start with indexes because they're fast and efficient. If what you want isn't there, try the search engines. Finally, turn to discus- sion group searches. Dan Keating can be reached at (954) 985- 4571, or send e-mail to dtkeats@ibm.net 

9


Here's a tip if you're trying to find a listserv mailing list or usenet discussion group: Try Tile.I Net at http:// tile.net. It has lists of discussion groups and listservs. Nova University also has a good site at http://www.nova.edu/ Inter-Links/ listserv.html. Another place where you can find those lists, and tons and tons of other information about the online world, is at RTFM (for "Read the Friendly Manual") at MIT. It's at ftp:// rtfm.mit.edu. It's not a pretty interface (it's general ftp navigation), but it has mountains of great information. 

# From page one: Finding fertility fraud 

You can obtain copies of the Orange County Register's series on "Fertility Fraud" from the IRE resource center. The series is 86 pages and costs $15 including shipping. Call the Resource Center at (573) 882- 3364 and ask for Item No. 12531. 

ferring these eggs to other barren women. The catch: The eggs were being transferred without the patients' consent, and some of the illegal transfers had resulted in live births. 

## Hospital roadblocks 

Register reporters Kim Christensen, Michelle Nicolosi, Ernie Slone and Kelleher had to go to great lengths to obtain the medical records of the allegedly criminal procedures that the doctors were performing. 

Some sources returned records anonymously by way of regular mail. Others used what investigations editor Jim Mulvaney called a "modern age Transom system," returning records to members of the team by way of self- addressed Federal Express envelopes. Kelleher even worked out a system where sources left records in the unlocked trunk of her car. 

Once validated, the records were turned over to Slone, who, using Access and Paradox, built a database of patients who had donated or received eggs through procedures performed by the accused doctors. Some records clearly showed corruption, while others took more investigation. But without Slone's database, the information would have been unwieldy. 

## Use local resources 

Slone's work was particularly handy when it came to identifying patients. Using local resources such as voter registration records, motor vehicle records and Social Security num- bers, Slone was able to find matches for a good number of the patients in his database. 

"When we went to these women, we were going to be changing their lives," said Mulvaney. "Most of the people didn't even know they were being victimized." 

That meant the Register staff would have to make absolutely sure they were contacting the right women. 

The team used commercial databases, such as CDB Infotek and Information America to further identify patients. This allowed them access to local census and advertising data- bases. 

Slone was then able to target certain women, such as those between the ages of 25 and 45 and those in higher income neighborhoods, to find additional matches among them. These women were far more likely candidates for in vitro 

fertilization and could possibly afford the $10,000 price tag. The extra step helped save the reporters from the potential disaster of contacting the wrong patient. "It's the ultimate invasion of privacy," added Mulvaney. "You have to be relatively certain." 

## Caught In the web 

As the team continued to follow the case, the reporters began posting their articles on the Register's World Wide Web site (http:// www.ocregister.com). 

They expected it to be an excellent resource for anyone who had heard about the case and wanted to know more. What they didn't expect was for it to help them locate Ricardo Asch, the primary doctor under investigation. 

Asch and one of his partners had fled the country under the pressure of the Register articles and five federal probes into the allegations. The health minister of Mexico called saying he had seen the Register's Web site and knew that Asch was trying to apply for a license to practice in Mexico. 

The team subsequently sent an undercover reporter to check out the story. 

## Not just for numbers 

After eight months, the Register's project pro- duced some startling numbers: .61 women were identified as fraud victims, 10 children were born from stolen eggs, and 32 patients had filed law- suits against the doctors. 

On Jan. 19, in Tijuana, Asch gave a four-day deposition in response to those lawsuits, and Slone drew on his computer-assisted instincts once again: He electronically transferred tran- scripts from the depositions to the Register, where they were entered into a text database program called askSam. 

Reporters queried the database for specific information from the deposition. This afforded the Register a major advantage over the competi- tion. 

"We were able to get straight to the exact facts of the day," said Mulvaney, who helped edit the 300 pages of transcripts per day. "Meanwhile, the Los Angeles Times' reporters were still writing off of the lawyers' claims." 

Ernie Slone can be reached at (714) 835-1234, or send e-mail to eslone@link.freedom.com 

10


Growing collection of federal databases 

# From the NICAR library 

NICAR offers a number of federal govern- ment databases. Here is a list of our growing collection: 
NEW . A monthly CD subscription for all 1995-96 Federal Election Commission campaign contri- butions by individuals and political action com- mittees, plus all presidential matching fund requests. 
NEW The Health Care Financing Administion's 1995 database of all Medicare-funded inpatient work in U.S. hospitals. 
Federal Railroad Administration data for accidents, casualties, and highway crossings. 1991-1995. 
Coast Guard boating accidents, 1969-1994. 
Federal Aviation Administration data, in- cluding airplane maintenance work documented in the service difficulty report, pilot licenses and grades, and aircraft registration. 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act records, for tracking who gets loans and who gets turned down, and finding redlining patterns. 
Federal procurement data, 1992-1994, in- cludes breakdowns by agency. 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms gun dealer records. 
National Bridge Inventory System data, includes inspection grades. 
FBI Uniform Crime Reports, a detailed compilation of crime data that includes statisti- cal breakdowns of individual murders. This includes the new 1994 data. 
Social Security death records, by name and social security number, going back to 1937. 
Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- tration violation data includes worker accidents 
and exposures to hazardous chemicals by com- panies. 
U.S. Department of Transportation truck accident and census data. It includes accidents by company and road. 
U.S. Small Business Administration loan guarantees, 1989-1995. This includes the name of the business, address, amount covered by the SBA, and status, including whether the loan went bad. 
U.S. Small Business Administration disas- ter loan guarantees, 1989-1994. This includes individuals and businesses, the amount covered by the SBA, and the status, including whether the loan went bad. 
U.S. Small Business Administration's list of minority companies certified for SBA assis- tance in seeking federal contracts. It includes the name of the company, its address, the owner, type of business and phone number. 
U.S. Department of Transportation hazard- ous materials accidents database, a collection of roadway, rail, air and waterway accidents from 1971 to 1995. 
U.S. Department of Transportation fatal accident reporting system. It includes all road- way accidents from 1988 to 1994. 
U.S. Coast Guard directory of U.S. mer- chant vessels. It includes the name of the ship, the managing owner, home port and various descriptive information. 
National Endowment for the Arts, grants, 1989-1993. 
For up-to-date prices and more information, call (573) 882-0684, or send e-mail to hicar@muccmail.missouri.edu. 

From page four: 'Divided We Sprawl' 

values for 1950, 1960 and 1970. This wasn't as much work as it seems: Each year had only 200 to 300 records. 

The Census of Government Finance Statis- tics came from the Missouri state data center. Each state should have one, but the file is also available directly from the Census Bureau. "This is the database from hell," Reeves said. The file contains 70 to 80 fields, many of them coded. 

"You'll get used to the codes," he said. They obtained HMDA data from NICAR and checked parts of their analysis against pub- lished government reports. 

Comparing census tracts over several de- cades was tricky. Tracts change and split as the population changes. Be prepared to spend a lot of time massaging the numbers if you plan to do this. 

The following week- long bootcamps offer hands-on training in computer-assisted reporting skills: 

NICAR Bootcamps, featuring training in the use of spreadsheets and database managers, accessing data in various media, such as nine-track tapes, and negotiating for data; May 19-24, July 14-19, and Aug. 11-16. Columbia, Mo. For more information, call NICAR 

11


# Bits, Bytes and Barks 

## Check out the IRE contest home page 

Read the abstracts of the 1995 IRE contest winners and finalists. The site also includes winners going back to 1979, information on how to enter, and background on the judges for the 1995 contest. The site is at http://www.ire.org/ contest 

## Data to think about 

You can find more than 85,000 governmental bodies in the census of governments. In addition to states, counties, and cities, the census includes every taxing entity from sewer districts to school district to library districts. 

The census looks at debt, property values, revenue and expenditures. The data includes the source of the revenue and purpose of the expenditure. There is also a directory file identifying all U.S. governmental units. 

The census is conducted every five years in years ending in "2" and "7." The most recent year for which all the data is available is 1987. However, the preliminary finance file for 1992 is available on CD-ROM from the Census bureau. 

To order the data, call the Census Bureau's customer service line at (301) 457-4100 Your state data center should also offer the data, probably at a cheaper rate. 

## NICARIANS moving on 

Glaston Ford, a NICAR graduate researcher, has ac- cepted a job as a computer-assisted reporter at the Corpus Christi Caller-Times. 

Also, staff member Natalya Shulyakovskaya has ac- cepted a position with the St. Louis Post-Dispatch's com- puter-assisted reporting program. 

## Taxed to the limit? 

Taxpayers in some American communities are at least 10 times more likely to face criminal charges from the Internal Revenue Service than those living in others, ac- cording to a new analysis of internal government records. 

Detailed data obtained by Syracuse University's Trans- actional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC ), also show that the chances the IRS will recommend criminal charges against anyone are extraordinarily remote: only 17 per million. (The FBI says you're five times more likely to be murdered.) 

TRAC's data is available via the web for reporters who want to do a CAR story on what's happening in their area. Reporters can download the data for individual federal districts. 

The Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse is a data research organization connected with Syracuse Uni- versity. The co-directors of TRAC are David Burnham, a former investigative reporter with the New York Times, and Susan Long, a professor in Syracuse's School of Manage- ment who has specialized in IRS issues for more than 25 

## Keep up with NICAR online 

Subscribe to our listserv and join in as reporters talk about how to do the job better. E-mail to LISTSERV@MIZZOU1.MISSOURI.EDU In the mes- sage, on the first line, write: subscribe NICAR-L your name. To join IRE on the Internet, the instructions are the same except, on first line, write: subscribe ire-1 your name. 

IRE and NICAR are also accessible through CompuServe's Journalism Forum. Go to the JForum, Sec- tion 19. Also look into the IRE/NICAR files in Library 19. 

'OW 60 'ON LINDED 'S'n THOUD-NON 

12


11759 OW

JO LOOY'S

unoss!W JO

H HON 001
 pue
