June 1999 A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

DEADLY PRACTICE? 

# Cosmetic Surgery 

## By Fred Schulte 

Sun-Sentinel, Ft. Lauderdale A few hours before dawn on April 1, 1998, police found a disoriented woman lying on the sidewalk outside a Fort Lauderdale medical office. Bandaged, bleeding and still attached to a catheter and heart monitor, she was suffering from seizures brought on by an overdose of anesthetic given during liposuction. 

The woman had stayed overnight in a doctor's office to recover from surgery. She awoke in the middle of the night gasping for breath and panicked when 

LEGAL DRUG HAZARDS 

Inside the FDA 

By Stephen Fried Philadelphia Magazine 

"Bitter Pills: Inside the Hazardous World of Legal Drugs" began as a per- sonal quest for answers after my wife had a severe adverse reaction to one sample pill of a new, heavily-marketed antibi- otic. It grew into a magazine article, which triggered an FDA investigation and won the 1993 National Magazine Award for Public Service Journalism. It eventually led to a five-year investigation of the entire pharmaceutical-industrial complex. The book focuses on issues of international drug safety while exposing the inner workings of the Food & Drug Administration, the pharmaceutical in- dustry, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, consumer advocates and the medical press. Unlike earlier books on these sub- jects, "Bitter Pills" weaves a personal narrative through the hardcore investi- gative reporting, putting a human face on the "legal drug problem." Even though 

nobody answered her screams for help. Thinking she would die if she didn't get help, she crawled out to the street and col- lapsed. She spent five days in a hospital intensive care unit recovering. 

I got a tip about the woman's ordeal from a source who said many poorly trained doc- tors did lengthy cosmetic operations-some- times eight hours or more - in their offices and then let patients stay overnight to recu- perate. This wasn't the first disaster, the source said. 

## Identifying Victims 

The source was right. Courthouse records showed the surgeon whose patient had ended up on the sidewalk had nearly a dozen mal- practice suits filed against him in just two years of practice in Fort Lauderdale. There were women who alleged they had been scarred horribly by botched breast-implant surgery and several people who couldn't close an eye or move their faces fully after a face lift. 

I decided to sample other plastic surgeons who advertised in our newspaper or in the Yellow Pages; many of them also had high numbers of malpractice suits. (Florida health officials consider three or more claims in a five-year period to be a red flag.) 

Next stop: Florida's Board of Medicine, which disciplines doctors and can be searched online. Some of the doctors in my sample also had been disciplined, in a few cases more than once, by the state medical board. 

But it was the early interviews with sev- eral plastic surgeons that persuaded me to pursue this as a major project. I had never heard so many doctors so critical of their colleagues. They spoke openly about the need for tighter state regulation of office surgery and criticized the state medical board 

Inside Uplink 

This issue features five re- porters honored in the 1998 IRE awards who used CAR to complete their work. 

We start with Fred Schulte of the Sun-Sentinel, Ft. Lau- derdale, who used a closed insurance claims database to find deaths from cosmeticsur- gery. 

Read how Stephen Fried used extensive Internet re- search and drug databases to uncover hazards in the legal drug world for his book, "Bit- ter Pills." 

We interview Vince Gonzales of CBS Evening News about his Internet and database work for "Tomb of the Unknown," which named an unidentified soldier. 

Mark Fazlollah of The Philadelphia Inquirer expands on a previous Uplink story about their series, that proved police skewed crime statistics. And Sherry Sontag tells how she and her co-authors built databases to track per- sonnel from military subma- rines. 

PAGE 12 Tech Tip 

PAGE 14 On The Internet 

See Surgery, page four


PAGE 15 Handout of the Month 

See Pills, page three


Uplink 

June 1999 Volume 11. Number 5 A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

EDITOR Brant Houston brant@nicar.org 

MANAGING EDITOR 

Cindy Eberting cindy@nicar.org 

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING 

EDITORS Len Bruzzese len@ire.org Anna Brutzman anna@nicar.org Richard Mullins richard@nicar.org 

COPY EDITORS Jessica Larson Jeanine Davis 

USING MILITARY DATABASES, WEB SITES AND LISTSERVES 

ART DIRECTOR 

Wendy Charron DESIGNER Kerrie Kirtland STAFF Dawn Fallik Jason Grotto Seth Jayson Ted Peterson Noemi Ramirez Aaron Springer Neil Warner 

# Naming the unknown 

By Dawn Fallik NICAR Staff 

Every day hundreds, if not thousands, of tourists gather at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Washington D.C. to watch the changing of the guard and honor the memory of unknown men who died in battle. 

So when CBS reporter Vince Gonzales began investigating whether the tomb's Viet- nam era Unknown Soldier had been identi- fied by military officials before being buried, he treaded softly around both memories and rituals. 

One officer told us "He's not a human beinganymore, he's asymbol," said Gonzales. The initial seven-month investigation in- volved multiple military databases as well as Internet archives and personal interviews. Four months after the first story aired, the Pentagon ordered the soldier's body exhumed from the tomb. When DNA tests proved the unknown soldier was indeed decorated Air Force Lt. Michael Joseph Blassie, his St. Louis family reclaimed their son's body and buried him with his own tombstone. 

## Military listservs 

Uplink is published every month 

by the National Institure for 

Gonzales said he began investigating the story after seeing an Internet posting by Ted Sampley, a reporter for U.S. Veteran Dis- patch. Sampley's story described how docu- ments pointed to Blassie and suggested that DNA testing could be used to confirm the suspicion. Gonzales went further, using in- terviews, documents and databases as confir- mation until the government was forced to unearth the tomb's soldier. 

Computer-Assisted Reporting, 

138 Neff Hall Annex 

Columbia, MO 65211. 

(573) 882-0684. Subscriptions are 

$40 for IRE members, $60 for 

nonmembers. 

Postmaster: Please send address 

changes to NICAR. 

Send email to jeanine@nicar.org 

NICAR is a joint effort of 

Investigative Reporters and 

Editors and the University of 

"At first I thought it was another one of those Internet conspiracies," he said. But as he started looking into the details of the Unknown Soldier selection process and talk- ing to the individuals involved, Gonzales was convinced Blassie's body was beneath the tomb. 

Missouri School of Journalism. 

NICAR services include hands-on 

newsroom training in computer- 

assisted reporting, special 

academic and advanced training 

in data analysis. 

NICAR is supported by grants 

from The Freedom Forum and 

other foundations intended to 

help the institute deliver its 

services nationwide to news 

organizations and associations. 

Without mentioning the words "tomb" or "unknown," Gonzales quietly began re- questing documents regarding Blassie, a 24- year-old pilot killed on May 11, 1972 during a mission. He requested all documents, in- cluding forensic reports, squadron logs and e-mail records that mentioned Blassie's name. During the investigation, Gonzales sent more than 20 FOIA request, to every branch of the 

Department of Defense as well as the U.S. Department of State and many others. He received documents from almost all of the 

## requests. Searching National Archives 

In addition, the reporter turned to the National Archives in Washington, D.C. for electronic database help. 

Weasked the Center for Electronic Records for the National Archives to run several searches for us on databases we didn't have. They were really intrigued by the project and so they helped us out a lot," Gonzales said. The center does charge for searches, and the station paid $30 for documentation and eventually pur- chased the entire Combat Area Casualty File. 

The two main databases Gonzales used were the Combat Air Summary and Detail Files (OPREA) and the Combat Area Casu- alty database, both available at the National Archives. OPREA includes information about all combat and non-combat air missions dur- ing the Vietnam War, including information about Cambodia and Laos. The casualty database included information on where and how military personnel died, their home of record, date of birth and other death details. 

Gonzales also used The Situation Report Army File, a database of ground combat operations in Southeast Asia, looking for army officers who were supposed to be on the ground and recovered the remains. 

"Not all of it was vastly useful; mostly we used it for some tidbits," he said. 

## Data confirmed tips 

Most of the data work was used to con- firm information received from sources: who had gone down where on what day and whose remains were recovered. 

All records related to the unknown selec- tion process were supposed to be destroyed after the soldier was buried, but Gonzales found government officials who had refused to comply. 

"Some people would hide the informa- tion in other files. One guy hid stuff in his garage. I now have a 5-foot tall filing cabinet filled with documents that were supposed to be destroyed," Gonzales said. 

Although the Pentagon first told the re- porters they would not receive any docu- 

See Soldier, page three 

2


From page two: Soldier 

ments regarding the selection process, Gonzales said they were successful because they placed FOIAs with the original agencies and stayed away from using the Tomb of the Unknown Soldiers reference. "It wasn't hard to get the databases, but it was hard to get clean data," he said, adding that the archive service tells users about potential obstacles. Data was put in wrong fields and names were spelled wrong. 

Gonzales used the Internet to find re- searchers and veterans who knew about Blassie's death and the following cover-up. He suggests that reporters doing military stories use variations on the names they want when searching government documents. He spent three months trying to find retired Col. Bill Parnell, whose troops recovered Blassie's skeletal remains and his identifica- tion card. The search was stalled because documents had the name spelled Darnell. 

Gonzales, teaming up with fellow re- porter Eric Engberg and producer Dick 

Meyer, held off from contacting the Blassie family until the initial investigation was end- ing. "We didn't want to drag their hopes up, but we needed to get them to sign affidavits allowing us to get military documents that usually only family Gonzales said. On June 29, 1998, the United States Defense Department confirmed what the Blassie family and the CBS reporters had suspected for almost a year; DNA tests con- firmed the remains buried at the tomb for 14 years were those of Michael Joseph Blassie. He is now buried at a veterans cemetery near the family's home in Florissant, Mo. "It's what we had been working toward all along and the family were such great people you want to work even harder for them, Gonzales said." The trio continues to investigate which military officials ordered Blassie's remains to be declared unidentifiable. Vince Gonzales can be reached by e-mail 

From page one: Pills 

most investigative journalism pieces focus on illegal drug use, the truth is that legal drugs kill many more people each year than illicit drugs. Adverse reactions to prescrip- tion and over-the-counter medications are the fourth-leading cause of death in America. 

"Bitter Pills" is based on thousands of documents, many obtained from Freedom of Information requests from the FDA and other federal agencies. Others were rescued from discovery materials in lawsuits that were later settled and sealed. It is also based on an exhaustive survey of over 100 books and thousands of papers on various subjects pertaining to drug safety and the legal drug culture. But "Bitter Pills" also incorporates hundreds of interviews with government officials, drug company executives, lawyers, physicians, academics, consumer advocates, pharmacists, nurses and patients worldwide - as well as coverage of dozens of conferences in the United States and Europe. 

I knew nothing about the drug business when I started this project. And I was faced with several problems: how to develop enough expertise on a highly technical field so I could 

report and write credibly, how to journalisti- cally handle the personal circumstances that got me interested in the subject so I might capture my passion for drug safety without being biased against drug makers, and how to humanize very technical issues. The drug industry is rife with potential conflicts of interest, but so is the world of investigative journalism. I tried to face those conflicts head-on in my reporting, and 'dadvise other investigative reporters to do the same. Be- cause my use of Internet resources was so extensive, I published a guide to the sources in the book, which was updated and ex- panded for the recently published trade pa- perback. There is also a large Web site for the book at www.bitter-pills.com, which allows for pretty extensive research by professionals and lay people. During the research for the book, my assistants and I obtained several electronic databases from IMS, the company that does the "Neilsen ratings" of drug use. We also obtained adverse reaction reporting databases for different drugs from the FDA, and deposition databases from most inves- 

GONZALES SAID HE USES THE INTERNET TO RESEARCH STORIES AND FIND PEOPLE ALMOST EVERY DAY. HE RECOMMENDS USING A "METABROWSER" WHICH SEARCHES SEVERAL INTERNET ENGINES AT ONCE, TO GET BETTER COVERAGE OF THE WEB. His FAVORITES: WWW.DOG PILE.COM AND PROFUSION. COM 

THERE ARE SEVERAL WEB SITES FOCUSING ON MILITARY RECORDS AND VETERANS' ISSUES. 

See pills, page eight 

WHILE INVESTIGATING THE TOMB OF THE UNKNOWN SOLDIER, GONZALES SAID HE USED THE POW/MIA ARCHIVE AVAILABLE THROUGH THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS AT: HTTP://LCWEB2.LOC.GOV POW/POWHOME.HTML 

3


HERE ARE A FEW USEFUL SITES FOR INFORMATION ABOUT DOCTORS AND DOCTOR DISCIPLINE: 

FEDERATION OF STATE MEDICAL BOARDS: HTTP:// FSMB.ORG. 

THIS IS A GOOD SOURCE FOR GENERAL 

INFORMATION ON DOCTOR DISCIPLINE. 

AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION: HTTP:// WWW.AMA-ASSN.ORGIAPS/ AMAHG.HTM 

THIS ONLINE DOCTOR FINDER INCLUDES THE MEDICAL SCHOOL ATTENDED AND TRAINING. 

FLORIDA AGENCY FOR HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION: HTTP:// WWW.FDHC.STATE.FL US. ALL DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS AGAINST FLORIDA DOCTORS CAN BE SEARCHED ONLINE. 

FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF INSURANCE: HTTP:// Www.DOI.STATE.FL.US. 

CLOSED MEDICAL 

MALPRACTICE CLAIMS CAN 

ALSO BE SEARCHED ONLINE. 

# From page one: Surgery 

for being too lenient in punishing incompe- tent surgeons. 

A couple of surgeons even said they knew of patients dying during what should have been routine cosmetic surgery. Unfortunately, none of these doctors could, or would, pro- vide any details such as patient names or dates of death. Local medical examiners weren't much help either; they said they had no way to check with the name and date of death. 

Senior writer Jenni Bergal and I began visiting morgues in South Florida and rum- maging through thousands of cases by hand. One by one, we found deaths and began contacting families. We also tried to track down police reports on patients who had died in their homes a day or two after surgery. Some of these provided additional details about the operations. 

By the time we published "Cosmetic Sur- gery: The Hidden Dangers" in November 1998, we had confirmed 34 deaths in roughly the last 12 years. Thirteen of them occurred in 1997 and 1998. We have since docu- mented five more deaths since 1997, bring- ing the total to 18. 

## Fatal Patter 

The number of deaths stunned state regu- lators, medical examiners and even the gos- sip-prone plastic surgeons of South Florida. 

A troubling pattern emerged in fatal cases. Many patients had more than one cosmetic procedure that took eight or 10 hours to perform in a medical office - longer than a liver transplant takes in a hospital. The vic- tims tended to be in late middle age, were overweight or had chronic medical condi- tions that made them questionable candi- dates for such operations. 

About half of those who had died since 1997 were men older than 50 even though women account for the vast majority of cos- metic operations in the state. 

## Finding Fault 

Still, we needed to keep the deaths in perspective. Nobody knew exactly how many cosmetic operations were performed in Florida every year, though it seemed from industry statistics to be at least 77,000. 

Lacking any means to compute a death rate, we searched for data to bolster the case 

that some cosmetic surgeons were the prob- lem. We found the data in the Florida De- partment of Insurance closed-claims data- base, which listed all malpractice settlements paid by insurance companies. These claims include cases settled by insurance companies before any lawsuit is filed. 

The state insurance department charged us $150 for about 10 floppy disks, which we loaded into Access with the help of John Maines, our research center's database specialist. 

The data included the doctor's name, location, specialty, training, severity of the injury and the money paid to the patient. Sorting by "plastic surgeons" gave us more than 1,100 cosmetic-surgery claims settled since 1990, including some deaths. 

Unfortunately, the database didn't explain the type of injury or how it occurred. We had to pay 15 cents per page for paper copies of a detailed narrative that had this information. None of the documents included the patient names, which are confidential under state law. Still, we documented scores of injuries, rang- ing from permanent facial scars to grossly disfigured breasts after botched implant sur- gery. 

Many doctors with multiple claims against them (several had a dozen or more) we already knew fromou search of Department Medi- cine disciplinary files. 

I also used the insurance - claims data to create graphics. For example, we published charts showing the severity of injuries, the average size of claims and the board - certifi- cation status of doctors with large numbers of malpractice claims. 

Board certification became important be- cause plastic surgeons held that uncertified surgeons were injuring patients. In fact, the data showed that 80 percent of the injuries came at the hands of board-certified plastic surgeons. 

Since our series, state officials have tight- ened oversight of office surgery. Florida's Board of Medicine banned overnight stays in medical offices and limited office surgery to six hours. The Florida Legislature also passed a bill that requires office-based sur- geons to report deaths and serious injuries to the state. 

Fred Schulte can be reached by e-mail at fschulte@sun-sentinel.com 

4


FBI REPORT PROVES PAPER'S FINDINGS 

# Counting crime right 

## By Mark Fazlollah, Craig R. McCoy and Michael Matza 

The Philadelphia Inquirer 

When the FBI released its 1998 crime report for major U.S. cities last month, the Philadelphia numbers confirmed the enor- mity of the city's past statistical falsification- the focus of a series of articles by The Inquirer over the previous year. Major crime dropped 7 percent in the rest of America, but it was up 11 percent in Philadelphia. In raw numbers, Philadelphia reported 2,603 more violent crimes and 9,211 more property crimes than in 1997. 

The mayor and the police commissioner explained it was not a crime wave, just the result of better police reporting after The Inquirer had hammered away at the issue for the past year. It was more than just an issue of dry statistics. Inquirer reporters had inter- viewed dozens of victims who were shot; stabbed, seriously beaten, raped or robbed, but the police had declared in nearly every case that no crime had occurred. 

Some victims were denied state-funded compensation because the police said no crimes had been committed. And suspects stayed on the streets. 

For decades, Philadelphia police engaged in a massive public relations conspiracy to make the city appear safer than it really was. The Philadelphia District Attorney recently characterized the falsification of crime stats as the city's "dirty little secret." 

## Exposing the secret 

The secret was exposed only after the city agreed to release zip drives with crime-by- crime data to The Inquirer and its sister paper, The Philadelphia Daily News. The database files provided a set of basic facts: dates, times, locations, crime-code classification, clearances information and more on 700,000 major and minor crimes from 1991 through 1997. Even- tually, Tom Torok of the paper's computer- assisted reporting and analysis unit, put all that information on a fast Web site: http:// home.phillynews.com/crime (See December 1998 Uplink). 

While the police department had resisted releasing this data for several years, Philadel- phia Mayor Edward Rendell finally ordered 

it made public. Inquirer reporters sorted the data using the Access database and Excel spreadsheet programs, allowing them to pro- duce crime analysis for each of the city's 23 precincts. 

Several precinct captains were able to help us find the flaws in the numbers for their individual districts. The captains had kept their own crime statistics for their precincts, and their numbers conflicted with the official figures. Pulling together the flaws in the precinct data, we were able to report that about 3,000 property crimes had apparently been deleted from the officials' count. The giveaway was a suspicious drop in car ripoffs that appeared in only one half of the year. 

The police department, after initially con- tending that the precincts' captains were wrong, would eventually concede that 2,559 car thefts and 560 larcenies were never counted in 1997. 

It was an enormous admission. The undercount in stolen cars alone exceeded the entire number of heisted vehicles reported for many cities in 1997. It was more, for example, than all the stolen cars reported for the year in Raleigh and Greensboro, Co(moined popula- tion: 454,000). It exceeded the combined 1997 total for Norfolk and Virginia Beach, VA (total population: 650,000). The department's admission of under- reporting gave us credibility with town watch groups and victims' advocates - and even some police officials. They would all be im- portant in the next phase of the project. 

## Humanizing numbers 

For our next round of stories, we wanted to put a human face on the numbers. We had to find victims whose crimes had been dumped. Among the steps we took was to compare court records for hundreds of cases with the crime-by-crime police data. We found that far more suspects were criminally charged with aggravated assault than police said they had ever arrested for the crime. The victims' advocates, rape counselors and town-watch groups gave us additional information about crimes they believed had never been properly reported by police. 

THIS STORY EXPANDS ON A PREVIOUS UPLINK PIECE ABOUT THE INQUIRER'S SERIES IN THE DECEMBER 1998 ISSUE. 

VIEW THE CRIME DATABASES USED BY THE PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER AND READ THE STORIES AT WWW.HOME.PHILLYNEWS. COM/CRIME 

See Crime, page six 

ORDER THE LATEST FBI UNIFORM CRIME REPORT DATA FROM THE NICAR DATA LIBRARY. CALL (573)884-7332. SEE PAGE 16 FOR A DETAILED DESCRIPTION, INCLUDING STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES, OF THE DATA SET. 

5


# From page five: Crime 

You CAN ORDER A TAPE OF THE PANEL "USING CRIME STATISTICS: SUCCESSES AND CAVEATS" FROM THE 1999 IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE FEATURING THE INQUIRER REPORTERS FAZLOLLAH AND MATZA FROM THE IRE STORE AT wWW.IRE.ORGISTORE 

Weinterviewed civilian crime-watch lead- ers who had kept their own personal records of crime in their neighborhoods. Politicians alerted us to victims who had complained of police inaction on crimes. 

Some police also helped us. They under- stood that dishonesty in crime reporting was hurting them. Because Philadelphia was sup- posed to be one of the safest urban areas in America, the bogus crime stats at times had been used to justify cuts in police funding. 

Helpful police showed us how to work the bureaucracy to obtain the original crime re- ports for incidents they knew had never made it to the official count. In getting this aid, we were able to exploit a kind of glasnost brought on by the arrival of a new reformist police commissioner, John F. Timoney, who had made accurate figures a cornerstone of his crime-fighting strategy. 

Timoney gyrated between two extremes as our reporting unfolded. On the one hand, he was blunt in his own lack of trust in Philadelphia crime figures. On the other, he often fought our reporting efforts when we pushed to illustrate the overall trends with concrete pictures of victims and concrete examples of police negligence. 

## Back to documents 

If an incident wasn't shown in the police data, we ordered the street cop's initial incident report. The city charges $15 for each copy of an incident report. We ordered hundreds. 

When we located victims, they often told us tragic stories of uniformed arrogance. 

Rapes, for example, sometimes had been coded as "investigate person" ifinvestigators questioned the reliability of the victims. Inci- dents of shooting and stabbing were coded as "hospital case." 

Even a murder case was affected by the downgrading. Melanie Alge, an 86-year-old widow, was critically beaten by a robber in May 1998. Police initially characterized the incident as a property crime, purse snatching. Two weeks after the beating Alge died. "Just because my sister was old is no reason to dismiss the incident as a mere purse snatch," Alge's sister would later write, demanding an investigation of police bungling. 

No suspect has ever been arrested in the murder. On May 17, the day after the FBI 

released its report on crime in the largest American cities for 1998, the Inquirer pub- lished another crime story. 

This time there was no zip drive. The police department had promised to give us new crime-by-crime data but did not com- plete the data before the story was published. 

Still, we were able to show some apparent flaws in Philadelphia's newest numbers by simply comparing them to the reports of other major cities. 

In the new numbers, Philadelphia police reported 8,701 aggravated assaults - a 40 percent increase over 1997. That still seemed low. 

Even with the dramatic 40 percent jump, Philadelphia's figures were at serious vari- ance with the number of aggravated assaults reported by other large U.S. cities. 

Philadelphia was 22 percent below the average per-capita assault rate for the major U.S. cities in 1998. 

Nine of the 10 major cities reported more aggravated assaults than robberies. Los Ange- les, for one, reported twice as many assaults as holdups. 

That makes sense, if you think about it. Surely, it is more likely to get beaten in a bar fight or other scuffle than to be held up. 

Not in Philadelphia. It was the sole excep- tion among the top 10 U.S. cities. The num- bers said 11,435 people were robbed last year but only 8,701 assaulted. 

University of Maryland criminologist Lawrence Sherman, named by the police commissioner to lead an audit of the department's reports, had previously said the ratio of aggravated assaults and robberies was important. 

Sherman said a city's statistics probably were unreliable if the relationship between the two crimes was far out of step with the national norms. 

And some officials never seemed to un- derstand the impact of the chicanery. "This isn't about how fast police respond to 911 calls, or how they deal with civilians, or how they fight crime. It's a matter of numbers," the mayor's spokesman, Kevin Feeley, told reporters when the scandal was unfolding last year. 

Mark Fazlollah can be reached by e-mail at fazlo.pia@phillynews.com 

6


CAR AND ESPIONAGE 

# Digging up submarines 

By Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew Authors 

Computer-assisted reporting: the phrase brings to mind complicated programs writ- ten to run analyses of miles of numerical data to create a litany of statistics to prove a trend, track the market, to do myriad tasks that have little to do with the old-fashioned investiga- tive method of running around the country asking questions lots and lots of questions. 

Certainly when we began the six-year odyssey of researching and writing "Blind Man's Bluff," our tale of submarine espio- nage during the cold war, we knew that there were no statistics to analyze, at least none we could get our hands on. Just about everything we wanted to write about was classified, and the Navy had made it clear that it was all going to remain classified. If this book was going to be written - and we were deter- mined that it was - we were going to have to dig out 40 years of undersea espionage the old-fashioned way: one source at a time. Our analysis would be similarly low-tech: if a submarine came back to port damaged at the same time another submarine was reported missing, maybe the two incidents were re- lated. 

Still, here are, writing an IRE article on computer-assisted reporting, and for good reason. Even for an old fashioned informa- tion dig, we quickly discovered that all the modern trappings of modems, databases, and laptops were going to prove crucial. Had the infant Internet been worth talking about when we began, that might have been a big help as well. Instead, we ultimately used the net at the end of our project, to announce rather than to dig for findings. But on to that in a bit. 

## Tracking interviews 

First our start. The very first thing we did was build a database-1 one of statistics but names, lots of names, all of them potential sources. This was a comprehensive list of just about every man who served on any subma- rine we had any reason to believe may have been involved in some incident that just might, maybe, if it panned out, end up in our book. There are all sorts of great database programs out there; D-Base, Foxpro and 

Access are among them. We didn't know about any of them at the time, and so we used an old DOS program called Profile. It worked great. It did just what we needed it to do: let us list men, their phone num- bers, addresses, and just what subs they served on in which years. 

By the way, when we say list, we mean type. Each profile was typed in by hand until we had thousands of names. We amassed those before we went out on a single interview. Then, as we traveled around the country-and we traveled a lot - we had the means of finding men by location, boat, by year, and we hoped these men just might be willing to tell us tales that they had never told their wives, children, parents or best friends. 

It's worth noting that an awful lot of our interviews were typed directly into a laptop computer. Ultimately, the laptop proved to be no more distracting to sources than a pad and pen. In fact, often a bit of electronic show-and-tell was the perfect way to break the ice. It was also the perfect way to keep interviews sorted and to pre- vent scrawled notes from becoming more illegible with time. Later, when we were looking for that particularly great quote, the one we found two or three years before we were ready to write, a simple computer search dug up the tidbit every time. While the two of us ran around doing interviews, Chris' wife Annette Lawrence Drew scoured books and old newspapers, creating a time line of events on dry land. When were the summit meetings held, the treaties signed, when was talk of detente taking place on land while spying heated up at sea, how often did the rhetoric match the reality? All of it now rested on keyboard access and helped us create con- text. 

As we wrote, we used a modem and a direct computer-to-computer connection to bounce ideas and drafts back and forth. And we used the computer to encrypt everything we sent. It wasn't that we really thought our phone lines were tapped. We just knew that it was possible. So we used Norton encryption-PGP is a better choice these days - to play what we called "I- 

THE AUTHORS SPOKE AS PART OF THE "WRITING THE INVESTIGATIVE BOOK" PANEL AT THE IRE CONFERENCE IN KANSAS CITY, Mo. THEY WERE JOINED BY INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER STEVE 

## WEINBERG. 

See Submarine, page eight 

To GET A TAPE OF THE PANEL, CALL THE IRE RESOURCE CENTER AT 573-882-3364 OR VISIT wwW.IRE.ORG/STORE 

7


STEPHEN FRIED HAS ESTABLISHED A WEBSITE FOR HIS BOOK BITTER PILLS AT WWW.BITTER- PILLS. COM. THE SITE OFFERS A HANDY GUIDE TO DRUG INFORMATION. 

DIRECT LINKS TO THE FDA, PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY WEBSITES AND VARIOUS MEDICAL PUBLICATIONS IS AVAILABLE AT wWW.BITTER-PILLS.COM/ INFO.HTML 

You CAN ORDER A TAPE OF STEPHEN FRIED'S PANEL FROM THE 1999 IRE NATIONAL 

CONFERENCE, ENTITLED "DANGEROUS 

MAINSTREAM DRUGS: How REGULATION BREAKS DOWN," FROM THE IRE STORE AT WWW.IRE.ORG/STORE 

# From page seven: Submarines 

Spy," maintaining protection against the unlikely. 

## Net spreads word 

By the time our book was researched and written, the Internet had grown up enough to become our first marketing tool. We found new Web pages written by and for submari- ners. We found their bulletin boards. We created long e-mail distribution lists. We spread the word, a new book with tales long untold was coming out. 

We know the effort was effective. We became one of the top sellers at Amazon.com before we were ever pub- lished. At least one man who received our e-mail on the fifth forward between sub- mariners and spies turned around and or- ganized a book signing that drew more than 200 people and where we signed nearly 

500 books. This was the first book for submariners and their relatives that showed that the men did more than guard the Golden Gate bridge. Soon we found heated discussions about "Blind Man's Bluff" on bulletin boards dedicated to the CIA and to Tom Clancy. 

It was also through the Internet that submariners came to find us, to write their concern about secrets that no longer were, to thank us for ending the silence, to offer their congratulations for a book by a couple of unknowns that surfed the best sellers list for longer than six months. 

Sherry Sontag can be reached by e-mail at sherry@panix.ocm 

Christopher Drew can be reached by e-mail at drew6@.com 

From page three: 

## Pills 

tigative journalismvarious lawsuits. Much of the material came for free or nominal charges (I'm good at begging, and the FDA will waive its FOI charges if you make the re- quests properly) but I did have to pay stenog- raphers for some of the depositions. 

In fact, the FDA is so strapped for cash in its investigative branches that I was asked to donate my copy of a deposition which cost me $500 - to the regulators because they couldn't afford it and couldn't go ahead with their investigation without it. 

I had great difficulty, especially with FOI material. It reached the point where I had to find the person within FDA who had the material wanted, get them to pull it and put in on their desk, and then re-contact the FOI office and tell them exactly where the mate- rial I was requesting could be found. All this FOI material, federal FDA data in particular, is deeply flawed because doctors don't report most adverse drug reactions, and the FDA is dramatically underfunded in their ability to analyze the data. I overcame these difficulties by doing extra reporting. 

There has been very little good investiga- tive journalism on the legal drug world be- cause the work is so difficult; the FDA is 

notorious for not filling FOI requests just as drug companies are notorious for ignoring the queries of journalists. 

Because I wanted the book to both ex- 

The FDA is so strapped for cash in its investigative branches that I was asked to donate my copy of a deposition - which cost me $500- to the regulator because they couldn't afford it 

plore the world of legal drugs and help other journalists do the same, I was careful to document in the book how certain informa- tion was obtained, leaving, I hope, a blue- print for other journalists to explore drug- related topics. 

Stephen Fried can be reached by e-mail at sfried@compuserve.com 

8


STATS AND SUCH 

# Look Before Touching 

By Neill A. Borowski The Philadelphia Inquirer 

You've arm-wrestled with the govern- ment agency for weeks. After haggling, they agree to make the data available to you. Finally, the shiny CD-ROM arrives in the mail. 

Quickly, you pour the file into a data- base. Like a surgeon, you wiggle your fin- gers, crack your knuckles and prepare to plunge your hands deep into the body of data. 

Wait a moment. Drop the scalpel. Re- move the gloves. No surgeon worth his license would operate without x-rays. The surgeon needs to look inside the patient and see before cutting. 

And the data analyst also should visualize the data before poking around. The best applied statisticians are the ones who, for example, run clinical trials for pharmaceuti- cal companies, advise analysts to study pic- tures of their data before they begin any calculations. 

Too often, we start analyzing the data before sitting back and taking in the whole view. Taking in the view doesn't have to be time-consuming. And it can be even more revealing than any measurement you make. 

The first step in visualization should be the histogram. The histogram is a bar chart, but the values are the frequencies of the key variable rather than the variable itself. Also, unlike the conventional bar chart, the histo- gram has no spaces between the bars. Here is a histogram showing full-time teachers by their salaries in the Philidelphia suburbs: 

7,000

6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

2,000

Full Time Teacher Salaries


The data in the teacher-salary histogram are somewhat mound-shaped, but don't exacty follow the normal curve super im- posed on the histogram. Many teachers are 

paid around 52,250. However, the bars to either side of this middle bar are shorter than they would be if th data approximated the normal curve. There's a sharp fall-off to the left of the $28,250 bar, but not as sharp a fall- off at the corresponding bar on the right side of the histogram. The $84,250 bar sticks out and might warrant some attention. 

Overall, the teacher salary data doesn't look too odd. You could design your histo- gram to exaggerate the oddities by adding more bars. And, conversely, by taking away bars, you mute the oddities. Generally, it makes little sense to have more than 15 bars in your histogram. 

The data don't appear to skew heavily to the right or left. A right skew, for example, would suggest there is a disproportionate number of teachers earning high salaries. In fact, when we run the usual statistics on the data, we find the mean is $52,120 and the median is $51,610 - not a very large differ- ence. If the mean were much higher than the median, the data would be right-skewed. 

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

1.6
7.9
14.3
20.6
26.9
33.3
39.6
45.9
 4.8
11.1
17.4
23.8
30.1
36.4
42.8

Total Years of Experience


Now take a look at another variable in the teacher salary database: total years of experi- ence. These data aren't mound-shaped. They look almost bimodal (having two equally sized peaks). The two groups would be teach- ers with little experience (left mound) and teachers with a great deal of experience (right mound). 

Usually the near-bimodal distribution would indicate the need for more research and possibly a great story. Why would expe- rience level plunge around year 14 and rise sharply in either direction? 

The answer can be found in public-school enrollment totals. The data in this example are from 1997. Public school enrollment 

CONTACT THE IRE RESOURCE CENTER AT (573) 882-3364 OR VISIT WWW.IRE.ORG/ RESOURCECENTER TO SEARCH FOR TIPSHEETS 

ALSO SEARCH THE LIBRARY OF MORE THAN 15,000 INVESTIGATIVE STORIES ONLINE AT WWW.IRE.ORG/ RESOURCECTER/ STORYDB.HT/ 

THE RESOURCE CENTER'S WEB PAGES INCLUDE LINKS TO RESOURCES FOR SPECIFIC BEATS AS WELL AS INFORMATION ON BUYING AUDIO TAPES FROM CONFERENCE PANELS. 

KEEP VISITING 

WWW.IRE.ORG FOR THE TIPSHEET OF THE WEEK AND THE STORY OF THE WEEK. 

See Stats, page ten


9


SEE RELATED TIPSHEET FROM 1998 INDIANAPOLIS NICAR CONFERENCE STATISTICS IN THE NEWSROOM, TIPSHEET # 797. 

THIS TIPSHEET IS AVAILABLE ONLINE AT WWW.IRE.ORG.RESOURCECENTER 

AN AUDIOTAPE OF THE PANEL IS ALSO AVAILABLE FOR FROM SOUND IMAGES, INC. AT (303) 649-1811. Ask FOR TAPE #40. 

From page nine: Stats 

since the early 1960s bottomed out in 1984, according to U.S. Education Department data. A teacher starting work in 1984 would have had about 13 years of experience by 1997. That corresponds with the valley in the histogram. Enrollment peaked in 1971. A teacher starting in 1971 would have had 26 years of experience in 1997 again agree- ing with our histogram. Finally, there has been a steady increase in enrollments since 1984 (the peak is forecasted for 2006). Again, the growth in student numbers in the late 1980s and early 1990s is reflected in the left side of the experience histogram. 

## Building the histogram 

If you have SPSS or SAS, building a histogram can be relatively painless. In SPSS (v. 9.0), from the pull-down menu: "Graphs" "Histogram... Setyour variable (teacher: salaries or expe- rience, for example) Click on "Display normal curve" Click OK and SPSS will produce the histogram. To modify your histogram, double-click on it in the SPSS output window. This will 

The best applied statisticians advise analysts to study pictures of their data before they begin any calculations. 

open the chart in the SPSS chart editor. The histogram can be edited for color, line width, etc. You also can tell SPSS to increase or reduce the number of fbars. To do this, click on the value labels under the X- axis (horizontal). This opens up the Interval Axis box. The default in this box is "Auto- matic" intervals. Click on "Custom" to change this and to make the "Define" but- ton available. Click on this button and the "Define Custom Interval" box will open. In "Definition," SPSS asks for the "# of inter- 

vals." Try 10 to begin with. If too wide, try 6 or 7. If too narrow, try 11 or 12. 

If your CAR shop doesn't have SPSS, you can build a histogram in Microsoft Excel. But it's much more cumbersome than statistical programs. 

In Microsoft Excel (97), from the pull- down menu: 

Your data is on one worksheet (record limit is 65,536, based on the number of rows in the spreadsheet). 

Sort the data and, after looking at it, determine how many bars you want in the histogram. Excel can automatically set the number of bars, but the program sometimes uses too many bars. Try to keep the number under 15. In the data, look at the smallest and largest records. Without sorting, you could use =min(range) and =max(range). Subtract the smallest from the largest and divide by one less than the number of bar desired. In the teacher salary example, the smallest is 18,500 and the largest is 86,828. The difference is 68,328. If we want 10 bars, each bar would be 7,592 wide. 

If we start the first bin at 18,500, Excel will set this as the midpoint of the bar. We don't want this. We want the lowest number (18,500) to be at the extreme left of the histogram. The midpoint of the first bar, then, would be 18,500 + (7,592/2) or 22,296. The second bin would be 22,296 + 7,592 or 29,888 and so on. Go to another part of the worksheet. Fill in the midpoints of the bins for Excel. 

From the pull-down menu, click on "Tools" and then "Data Analysis. This opens the Data Analysis box. Scroll down to "Histogram" and click OK. 

Set the "Input Range," which is the spreadsheet range of the variable of interest, such as teacher salaries. Set the "Bin Range," which is the spreadsheet range of the bins. Then select the "Labels" option and click OK. (Do not click the "Labels" box unless you' included column headers in the spread- sheet ranges you've highlighted). 

Excel will insert another worksheet, which will include the bin midpoints in the A column and the frequency in the B col- umn. Use the frequency count to order a column chart from Excel. The A column (labeled "Bin") will be the X-axis labels. 

See Stats, page eleven 

10


## From page ten: Stats 

After building the column chart, notice that the bars are not touching. If you're simply trying to visualize the data, you don't have to make it a true histogram with the bars touching. If you'r publishing the histogram, you'll want the bars to touch. To do so, click on the bars in the chart. Go to the Excel pull- down menu and click "Format" and "Se- lected Data Series This opens the "Format Data Series" box. Click on the "Options" tab. Set the "Gap Width" to "0," The result will be no space between the bars. 

100,000

80,000

60,000

40,000

20,000

N
20848
8530

Female Teachers Male Teachers


Other chart options will help to visualize the data. A good choice when comparing one variable between two groups is the box plot or "box and whisker" chart. 

In the example, the variable on the X axis is whether the teacher is male or female. The Y axis is the salary level. The whiskers of the box plot show the end, or extreme, values. 

Other chart options also will help to visualize the data. A good choice when comparing on variable between two groups is the box plot or "box and whisker" chart. 

In this case, they're nearly equal for each sex. The shaded box is the interquartile range - the range between the 25th and 75th per- centiles. The line through the box is the 

median. 

At a glance, the median for males clearly is higher than for females ($55,944 versus $49,616). In fact, the male median is just under the top of the female interquartile range, suggesting relatively sharp pay differ- ences. The difference between the sexes might be explained in part by the experience levels (median 22 years for males versus 13 years for females). In SPSS, go to "Graphs" and "Boxplot" from the pull-down menu. The process is much more complicated in MS Excel. There is an explanation of how to do a box plot at the Microsoft site ( http:// support.microsoft.com/support/kblarticlesl q155/1/30.asp) or search for "whisker" in the Microsoft Personal Support Center. For visualizing relationships between two variables before running a regression analy- sis, try the scatterplot. If we wanted to see a relationship between years of experience and salary, a scatterplot would look like this: 

90,000
 80,000
 70,000
 60,000
 50,000
 40,000
 30,000
 20,000
 10,000

0
10
20
30
40
50
 Years of Experience


The data points suggest a linear relation- ship. The dark line is the fitted line (the line derived from the regression analysis), which you can order up as an option on the chart. In SPSS (9.0) you also can point to a datapoint on the scatterplot and click on it. It will embed the record number in the plot (that's what the 11,505 is above). The SPSS Data Editor also will automatically go to each record in question as you point. 

The scatterplot in MS Excel can be or- dered from the Chart Wizard as an XY (Scatter) chart. When the chart is complete, from the pulldown menu click on "Chart" and "Add Trendline and a line will be fitted to the data. 

Neill Borowski can be reached by e-mail at nborowski@phillynews.com. 

UPCOMING IRE REGIONAL CONFERENCE IN Los ANGELES, SEPTEMBER 9-12, 1999. SEE WWW.IRE.ORG/ RESOURCES/CONFERENCES.2 FOR DETAILS. 

UPCOMING CAR BOOT CAMPS JULY 18-23 AND AUG. 8-13 WILL BE HELD AT THE MISSOURI SCHOOL OF JOURNALISM TO TEACH JOURNALISTS THE BASICS OF USING DATABASES AND SPREADSHEETS. FOR MORE INFORMATION, CALL IRE/ NICAR AT (573) 882-2042 OR VISIT WWW.IRE.ORG 

11


TECH TIP 

# FIPS fixes 

CHECK OUT HTTP:// ZIPINFO.COM/PRODUCTS/ PLFIPS/PLFIPS.HTM IF YOU'RE INTERESTED IN BUYING A FIPS DATABASE. PRICES START AT $29.95. 

JEFF SOUTH, ALONG WITH TERESA ALLEN AND BRANT HOUSTON, PRESENTED A PANEL CALLED "FROM NEWSROOM TO 

CLASSROOM: 

TRANSLATING WHAT YOU'VE LEARNED FOR THE NEXT GENERATION" AT THE NICAR CONFERENCE IN BOSTON. You CAN ORDER A TAPE OF THE PANEL AT WWW.IRE.ORG/ STORE 

## By Jeff South 

Virginia Commonwealth University To you, it's Texas. But to the Census Bureau, it's "48." You say New York's capital is Albany. Data heads call it "3601000." The Seattle Seahawks' stadium is in King County, Wash. Geo-geeks say the Kingdome is in "53033." Welcome to the digit-laden world FIPS codes - the numbers the federal government uses for every state, county, city and metro- politan area. These codes are not ony shorter, but they are also more precise: After all, is that South Texas county spelled La Salle, LaSalle or Lasalle? But FIPS codes can pose problems, too. Is the code for Alaska "02" or just "2"? Is California "06" or "6" - and within that state, is Orange County "059" or simply "59"? Moreover, what's the data type for these codes - numeric or character? 

Those are important questions if you're using Access, FoxPro and other tools for doing data analysis. 

If one table has its FIPS codes as numeric fields and another table's codes are character strings, you can't automatically join the tables. FIPS codes - the acronym stands for Federal Information Processing Standards- are used in datasets on a variety of subjects, from population and home loans to pollu- tion and traffic accidents. 

But they're stored in an annoying array of ways by the Census Bureau, the IRS and other government agencies. 

If one table has its FIPS codes as numeric fields and another table's codes are character strings, you can't automatically join the tables. 

Sometimes FIPS codes are numbers; other times they're text. Even when the codes are character strings, they can have different formats, such as "007" (leading zeroes) or 

"7 (a number followed by spaces or blanks) or 7" (spaces before the number). Here are some tips on dealing with varia- tions in FIPS code fields. One tip is a workaround: how to join on the fly tables that have their codes stored in different ways. The other tip is a fix: how to add perma- nent fields that present FIPS codes the right way. 

## What is the right way? 

FIPS codes should be character fields. State-code fields should be two characters wide; county-code fields, three; metropoli- tan areas, four; cities, county divisions and other populated places, five. 

The codes should have leading zeroes, so that Alabama is "01," Alaska 02," Arizona "04" 

## The codes are stored in an annoying array of ways by the Census Bureau, the IRS and other fovernment agencies. 

(Curiously, there is no "03" among the state codes, and the codes for counties are all odd numbers.) 

But what do you do when a government agency provides a table with FIPS codes stored differently? I encountered this re- cently when got 1996-97 county-to-county migration data from the IRS: All the FIPS codes were numeric (California was "6," and Los Angeles County was "37"). In years past, the codes were all character fields (California was "06," and Los Angeles County was "037"). 

To join the new and old data . that is, to make the records match - I had to persuade FoxPro to consider the number "6" the same as the character string "06" and the number "37" the same as the character string "037." 

The work around: the VALO function. VALO converts a character string into a numeric value. In the migration case, I wanted to match my FIPS-as-text fields 

See FIPS, page thirteen 

12


From page two: FIPS 

(st_txt, cnty_txt) in my old data with my FIPS-as-numericfields(st_num,cnty_num) in my new data. So I used this as my join condition: where new.st_num = val(old.st_txt) and new.cnty_num = val(old.cnty_txt) That says: Match the numeric FIPS code with the numeric value of the character FIPS codes. The VALO function works in Access as well as in FoxPro. VALO also can be used to join two text fields that have different FIPS code formats. A Virginia state agency once gave me data in which the county FIPS codes were character strings but without leading zeroes. 

Often you'lll want to permanently change how FIPS codes are stored in your data. For instance, it will be faster and easier to join tables if your codes are consistent. More over, your codes must use the same format if you want to append records from one table into another table. 

I wanted to join this with Census Bureau data in which the county codes did have leading zeroes. So my join condition was: where val(table1.fips) = val(table2.fips) That way, "1" in the state's FIPS code field.matched "001" in the Census Bureau's field, "3" matched "003," and so on. 

The fix: STR, LTRIM and PADL func- tions. 

Often want to permanently change how FIPS codes are stored in your data. For instance, it will be faster and easier to join tables if your codes are consistent. More- over, your codes must use the same format if you want to append records from one table into another table. 

Let's say you have a table in which the state FIPS code (st_num) and county FIPS code (cnty_num) fields are both numeric. In FoxPro's Table Designer, insert two char- acter fields: st_fips, with a width of 2; and cnty_fips, with a width of 3. Then run this command: 

replace all st_fips with; padl(ltrim(str(st_num)),2,(0') This takes a numeric "1" in the st_num field and turns it into the character string "01" in the st_fips field. Here's how the command works, start- ing from the middle of the second line: 

str(st_num) means convert the number into a char acter string. 
Itrim(str(st_num) means trim all the blanks from the left side of this character string. 
padl(ltrim(str(st_num)),2," means pad the string with zeroes so it fills up a width of 2 characters. 

You can change the numeric cnty_num field into cnty_fips, a character field with leading zeroes, the same way: replace all cnty_fips with; padl(ltrim(str(cnty_num)),3,'0') Use a similar command to change a text field without leading zeroes (cnty_no0) into one with leading zeroes (cnty_fips): replace all cnty_fips with; padl(alltrim(cnty_no0),3,'0') This says: Take the cnty_no0 field; trim all the blanks at the beginning and end; then pad it with zeroes to a width of three char- acters. 

## Conversions in Access 

Access does not support PADL, but it has an even easier function for converting the data. If your county FIPS codes are in a numeric field (cnty_num) and you want them in a text field with leading zeroes (cnty_fips), update the cnty_fips field to: Format(cnty_num, "000") 

The same function will convert a text field without leading zeroes into one with leading zeroes. 

Jeff South can be reached by e-mail at jcsouth@vcu.edu. 

THE LATEST SET OF FIPS CODES FOR ALL 

GEOGRAPHIC ENTITIES IS AT 

HTTP://www.NIST.GOVI ITL/DIV897/PUBS/55NEW/ INDEX.HTM 

THE CENSUS BUREAU HAS DOWNLOADABLE LISTS OF CODES AT HTTP:1/FTP.CENSUS.GOvI GEO/Www/GAZETTEER/ PLACES.HTML 

13


ON THE INTERNET 

# Geo-spatial sites 

SIMPSON, ALONG WITH ROBERT CHEN, PRESENTED A PANEL CALLED "SATELLITE IMAGERY ON YOUR DESKTOP: PRACTICAL PROJECTS FOR JOURNALISTS" AT THE BOSTON CONFERENCE. CONTACT THE IRE RESOURCE CENTER AT (573)882-3364. 

SEE RELATED TIPSHEETS FROM 1999 NICAR CONFERENCE SATELLITE IMAGERY - ON YOUR DESKTOP, TIPSHEET #940 IMAGE INDEXES, DATA SET INDEXES, GAZETTEERS AND SATELLITE TRACKING SOFTWARE, TIPSHEET #941 THESE TIPSHEETS ARE AVAILABLE ONLINE AT WWW.IRE.ORG/ 

## By Christopher Simpson 

RESOURCECENTER 

American University 

Simpson presented this handout at the 1999 NICAR NationalConference. It sug- gests great web sites to get you started wth satellite imagery and geospatial data. 

http://eduww.cr.usgs.gov/webglis 

The U.S. Geological Survey's EROS DATA Center is the government's pri- mary unclassified intelligence imagery from the 1960s and 1970s. GLIS is the primary index to the collection and is relatively easy to use considering the vast scope of the material. Declassification of certain intelligence satellite imagery from the later 1970s and 1980s is presently underway and will most likely be available via USGS site. 

http://gcmd.gff.nasa.gov and http://www- eosdis.ornl.gov/daacpages/otherdaacs.html 

These NASA sites are gateways to a giant, evolving effort, known as EOSDIS, to link indexes to imagery around the world. The effort is by no means complete and sometimes operates awkwardly, but the sites permit access to a wide range of unclassified U.S. government imagery and scientific data gathered from outer space. 

http://waa.saanoaa.gov 

The National Oceanographic and At- mospheric Administration's index of its weather imagery provides high-quality and, often, free imagery of continent-sized parts of earth. 

In addition to overhead images of hur- ricanes and typhoons, it provides the wide- angle imagery necessary to see the scope of forest fires throughout the northern Ama- zon, environmental crises in northern Af- rica and similar very-large scale phenom- ena. 

http://terraserver.microsoft.com 

http://www.crisp.nus.edu.sg/crisp.html 

This Singapore-based ground station pro- vides an index of imagery collected over South- east and much of South Asia by satellites from the United States, Canada, Europe, SPOT, Japan and other sources. 

http://isis.dlr.delservices/ISIS/ISIS-query.html 

This index, sponsored by the German Aerospace Center, provides convenient ac- cess to imagery of Europe from several sources, as well as links to other indexes worldwide. 

http://www.eurimage.itleinet/ einet_home.shtml 

The European Space Agency operates this user-friendly index imagery collected over Europe, much of the Middle East and the western territories of the former USSR. 

http://www.fas.orglirplindex.html 

Operated by the Federation of Ameri- can Scientists, this index specializes in declas- sified "spy satellites" imagery and support for treaty-verification projects. 

http://www.spaceimaging.comlhomelprod- ucts/carterralworldviewlindex and http:// www.spaceimaging.comlhomelproducts/ carterralcarterra3dlindex.html 

This is Space Imaging Corporation's Carterra imagery index, which provides ac- cess to commercial and unclassified govern- ment imagery gathered over the United States. The second URL provides the first access to "assembly line" (as distinct from custom- built) fly-through, moving satellite images that simulate the view that low-flying aircraft might see over, say, China's nuclear test range at Lop Nor. 

http://www.spot.com and http:// wwww.spot.com/spot/home/sirius/welcome.htm 

SPOT Image's commercial DALI index presently costs $100 annually to subscribe. It provides an unusually well-organized and complete index from medium-resolution imagery (about 30 meters per pixel) for al- most any point on earth. 

SPOT's imagery is often more complete and more current than its competitors, though not as useful for close-up shots of the ground. The new Sirius index promises to maintain DALI's functionality, offer new services and be available for free. The Sirius product should be available this spring. 

This very large data collection com- bines USGS aerial photography of the continental United States with very high- resolution imagery gathered throughout the world by Russian Sovinformsputnik satellites. The USGS data can be down- loaded for free; the high-quality Russian data is offered at a modest cost but is spotty in its coverage. 

Chris Simpson can be reached by e-mail at simpson@american.edu 

14


HANDOUT OF THE MONTH 

# Usable Data 

By Hal Straus The Washington Post Straus provided this handout at the Na- tional Computer-Assisted Reporting Confer- ence held in Boston this past March. Three Ways to Buid Compelling Web Databases 

Web databases aren't CARdatabases. And the fact that you need different software to deliver them is only one of the reasons. Here are three un-CAR things you can do to keep your work from landing on the Web with a loud thud. 

1. Use the Right Software 
Perl and VBA/Active Server pages are good options for small and medium-sized sites. They don't work well when your vol- ume is high (10 concurrent queries, 100,000 page views of a given feature). The problem: Forking. 
You can speed things up a lot (and minimizeforking) by building a Unixsystem from scratch. If you're AOL or Yahoo, with lots of programmers and a "tech" culture, that's a good plan. 
If you're a newspaper or local broadcast Web site, a better solution is to go out and buy a Unix-based Web Application Server. The biggest names are Sapphire/Web and Net Dynamics. At Washingtonpost.com, we decided those cost too much. We bought Oracle Application Server and Netscape Application Server. From a database editor's point of view, they're about as easy to use as ASP or Cold Fusion, but they're faster. 
## 2. Forget All That Relational-Database Nonsense 
This is simple stuff: You're probably al- ready doing it. But if you're not, you can really speed up your Web databases and make them a lot more pleasant for users if you break some database design rules. 
Don't use joins. Joins work fine when you're using Access to do a CAR project. They're recommended in all the relational- database books. But even if they're perfectly indexed and you're using grossly overpow- ered hardware, they take too long on the Web. 
Put data for different Web pages in separate tables. Then, store the tables in system memory or put each of them on different hard drives. If possible, put the 

indexes your queries use on different drives as well. For example, if you're posting a school's database and have the test scores on a different page than the principal's name, make a different table for the scores that only has the scores and the basics that you need on that page (school name, etc.). 

Try to avoid ODBC drivers to access your database. Native drivers are faster. 

## 3. Keep It Simple 

Most of us in the news business got into using databases to produce stories. We're used to mining them to death to make sure that we've gotten every last bit of informa- tion out of them, then distilling the results down to understandable chunks when we write our stories. Or we are letting another reporter or an editor do it. That's great, but on the Web, you'll inevitably run into one big problem: 2.5 seconds 

Our server logs tell us that site visitors spend less than three seconds on an average interior Web page, which is where your database will end up. If you want Web users to actually explore your databases, you've got to do a few simple things: 

Design your features so users can go somewhere productive with a single click. You can give them lots of radio buttons and text boxes and search options, but you can't count on them because 2.5 seconds isn't a lot of time. Example of what not to do: The General Social Survey http://gort.ucsd.edu/gss/ extract.html. Example of what to do: The Washing- ton Post Poll Vault http:// wwww.washingtonpost.com/wp-sru/politics/polls/ vault/vault.h Number-heavy pages don't work any better on the Web than they work in print, even if every number is a link. Example of what not to do: The Toxic Release Inventory Scorecard http:// scorecard.orglenv-releaseslus.tcl#major_ emical_releases: Example of what to do: The Seattle Times School Guide http:// texis.seattletimes.com/schoolguide. 

UPCOMING HANDS-ON CAR TRAINING ON COVERING CAMPAIGN FINANCE: JULY 23-25 IN CHICAGO. "GEARING UP FOR THE 2000 ELECTION." CONTACT RTNDF FOR MORE INFORMATION (202) 467-5215 OR CHECK THE INTERNET AT: HTTP://www.RTNDF.ORG/ PRODEV/RTNDF/ CHICAGO99/ CHICAGO99.HTM 

SEPT. 17-18 IN DES MOINES. NICAR, CENTER FOR RESPONSIVE POLITICS, CENTER FOR PUBLIC INTEGRITY, MIDWEST STATES CENTER HOST A WEEKEND ELECTION COVERAGE SEMINAR FOR POLITICAL 

REPORTERS IN THE 

## MIDWEST. CONTACT 

BRAD LINT AT 515-255-8420, OR BY E- MAIL AT BLINT@NETINS.NET. 

Hal Straus can be reached by e-mail at Hal.Straus@washingtonpost.com. 

15


# Bits, Bytes and Barks 

## NICAR data update 

Updates of the following data set are now available assaults and murders of police officers. through NICAR's Data Library: 

FBI's Uniform Crime Reports (1980, 1990, 1993-97) enforcement agencies across the country. UCR comes in six tables: 

contain detailed crime data gathered by the FBI from law statistics for the whole United States. The reports don't 

The Return A database gives the number of crimes in 27 categories, including murder, rape, robbery, assault, burglary and larceny. Crimes are reported by month and broken down into actual offenses, offenses cleared by arrest and clearances under 18. 
Supplement to Return A provides greater detail on property crimes. Specific types of crimes (pocket picking, gas station robbery) are given, along with amounts stolen and recovered. 
The Age, Sex and Race database provides male and female totals for various crimes. Race is given for juveniles and adults. The crimes are more specific, including drug offenses, gambling, DUIs, runaways and others. 
The Supplemental Homicide Report. For each homi- cide, the data includes age, sex and race of offenders and victims, as well as their relationship and the circumstances of the crime. It also includes justifiable homicides by police and citizens. 
Arson is set up like the Return A and Return A Supple- ment databases. Information includes fires in uninhabited plant inspections) and more. structures and property damage estimates. 

The Police database provides information about 

Strengths: FBI Uniform Crime Reports are the only standardized source of detailed, agency-by-agency crime identify criminals or victims, but they do provide interest- ing information about them, including age, sex, race, and sometimes crime circumstances. Do the numbers for your area look suspicious? Interesting stories have been written about discrepancies between what really happens and what gets reported to the FBI. (See "Counting Crime Right?s" story, page 5). 

Weaknesses: All UCR data is self-reported; if a law- enforcement agency wants to fudge the numbers, it's easy to do. The FBI has integrity checks in place, but it mostly takes agencies at their word. Even the checks can cause problems: If the FBI deems an agency's (or entire state's) reports unreliable, it may delete them without telling anybody. Because different jurisdictions have different classifications for some crimes, these crimes are sometimes left out of the database without notation (i.e. Minnesota was listed as having no rapes for some years). So it is, important to check values against local numbers. 

Also coming this summer, HAZMAT (hazardous ma- terial spills), OSCAR (nursing home inspections), Federal Procurements (federal contracts), USDA (meat-packing 

To order, call NICAR at (573) 884-7332. 

OW 987 ON LINDED Ali 'S'N 

11599 OW JO looyps JO HON 8EI "ou] pue 

16
