September 2000 

MAPPING 

# Census and GIS 

## By Steve Doig Arizona State University 

Still trying to persuade the newsroom bean counters that they should pay for a good geographical information system mapping program? Tell them the U.S. Constitution requires it. 

Well, okay, the Constitution doesn't ac- tually mention computer mapping. But it does mandate a national census every 10 years. And a newsroom that tries to do cen- sus stories without a GIS will be about as effective as one that covers breaking news without cell phones and digital cameras. It 

## CRIME Rampage killers 

By Ford Fessenden 

The New York Times 

In March, The New York Times pub- lished "Rampage Killers," a four-part se- ries that revealed the results of a database project we undertook of 100 cases of ex- plosive public murder over the past 50 years. These killings are not new, we said, although they may have increased in the 90s. We found more evidence of serious mental illness than of fascination with vio- lent video games, and pointed out some important ways these criminals differed from regular murderers. 

The series showed what you can do with the techniques of precision journal- ism. It showed how you can speak with authority when you let computer tools help you manage and distill large amounts of information. 

The seeds were sowed at The New York Times in 1999, when Thom Shanker, an editor in the Washington bureau, sug- gested a few days after the Kosovo pogrom 

can be done, but it's a lot more difficult. 

The census, in fact, is a perfect story for mapping. The reason is that every scrap of census information is connected to some particular piece of geography. Moreover, a key part of most census stories is explaining how the demographics of various places com- pare to each other. Which do you think read- ers, viewers and editors would rather see: A page full of numbers, or a nicely shaded map? 

Of course, journalists were printing and broadcasting maps long before GIS programs came along. But even relatively simple maps can take a graphic artist hours to complete using a drawing program. And census maps are likely to be complex. For instance, a cen- sus tract map of a typical metro area will con- tain hundreds of polygons to be drawn and shaded, while creating and shading a map of the nation's 3,156 counties could mean days of work. A GIS, however, can make such maps in seconds. 

## What to buy? 

Okay, you're convinced. So start shop- ping for a good GIS program. There are a variety of them available, including MapInfo and Maptitude. But I and many other CAR specialists would recommend ESRI's ArcView 3.2. 

ArcView is pricey - expect to pay about $1,200 for a copy. But ArcView's advantages are many. It works well on both PC and Macintosh computers. ArcView maps are easily exported into files that can be opened and enhanced by your graphic artists. The widespread use in the CAR community means you can get quick help from journal- ism mapping experts via the NICAR-L and JAGIS-L (Journalism and GIS) e-mail lists. You can get excellent training at NICAR's mapping boot camp scheduled for Oct. 20- 

## Inside Uplink 

Continued on page fourteen


This month's issue of Uplink focuses on one of the hottest CAR topics: mapping. With the Census 2000 data coming out soon, mapping is a skill that will be in high demand. Jeff Tho- mas of the Colorado Springs Ga- zette shares his experience get- ting started with mapping this past year (see page two). Ron Nixon of The Roanoke Times used mapping to reveal faults in plans to relieve flooding (see page four). Jennifer LaFleur, of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, writes about how journalists in Europe are using mapping (see page six). 

## Access Reports 

The report tool in Access is an often overlooked part of the database manager, but Mike Himowitz of The (Baltimore) Sun explains how he found it particu- larly useful for a project investi- gating Maryland's sentencing tem for crimes with handguns. 

SEE PAGE TWELVE 

No more confusion 

In the midst of a large analy- sis project, it's likely you've saved what seems like a zillion que- ries. Richard Dalton, of Newsday, offers some naming conventions that promise to simplify this process and make it easier to retrace your steps later. 

SEE PAGE TEN 

Continued on page five


## Uplink 

September 2000 

Volume 12, Number 7 A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

EDITOR Brant Houston 

MANAGING EDITOR Mary Jo Sylwester 

ASSOCIATE EDITOR Mike Sherry 

ART DIRECTOR Kerrie Kirtland 

NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. 

NICAR services include hands- on newsroom training in computer-assisted reporting, special academic and advanced training in data analysis. 

DIRECTOR OF PUBLICATIONS Len Bruzzese 

SUBSCRIPTION ADMINISTRATOR John Green 

Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 138 Neff Hall Annex Columbia, MO 65211. (573) 882-0684. Subscriptions are $40 for IRE members, $60 for nonmembers. 

Postmaster: Please send address changes to NICAR Send e-mail to jgreen@nicar.org 

# MAPPING A beginner's lessons 

## By Thomas 

Colorado Springs Gazette The first moral of this story is: New CAR tools don't always make life easier. They can help you tell a smarter story - as our first attempt at using mapping software did for us in one you're still likely to break a sweat getting up the learning curve. 

Shortly after I returned from NICAR's three-day mapping seminar in Columbia, Mo., last October, voters in our largest school district rejected a bond issue. Three years earlier, they had approved an even larger bond. Naturally, we asked: Why the turn- around? Finding the neighborhoods where the drop was most dramatic would steer us to the kind of people we needed to talk to. Mapping software could help us do this. It also could help us see if the swing precincts had older or younger people, more or fewer kids, higher or lower income, etc. 

Mapping software gave us the ability to automate the colored-pencil part, giving us much more lead time to report the story. 

We had used spreadsheets in the past to unearth voting trends in the precincts, but the chore usually wasn't complete until we had broken out the colored pencils and a large precinct map. Mapping software gave us the ability to automate the colored-pencil part, giving us much more lead time to report the story. It also would show us the underlying demographics of the precincts where the vote swing was most pronounced. 

## Getting started 

I dusted off a copy of ESRI's ArcExplorer CD, which I had picked up at NICAR's Bos- ton conference several months earlier. This is a stripped-down version of ArcView, the standard in most GIS-equipped newsrooms. As I found out, it did the job, barely. For example, ArcExplorer lacks the extensions 

necessary to export a map in a format the art department can work with. Publishing a map would have been nice, but more-informed reporting was our first goal, and the tight turnaround on the story precluded building a map from scratch on the Macs, so we went without the map. 

We poured the precincts' "yes" and "no" votes on the bond issue into two columns of a spreadsheet, and poured the votes from the 1996 election into two other columns. For each precinct in each year, we calculated a support ratio (yes votes/no votes). Then, for each precinct, we calculated the percentage change in the ratio from 1996 to 1999. Pre- cincts with the most-negative change num- bers were those where support had dropped most dramatically. We added a column indi- cating voter turnout in each precinct. This took just a few minutes. 

The bigger job was to assemble the needed digitized maps, which ESRI calls shapefiles: voting precincts (to plot the change in vot- ing behavior), Census tracts (to plot demo- graphics), and streets (to help the eye navi- gate the map). 

I asked the county's GIS department for a digital map of precinct boundaries. No problem, they said: That will be $500. The GIS manager, however, was on my side and sneaked me onto the next day's county com- mission agenda, where I made my plea for a fee waiver, which was granted. left the meet- ing with the CD. 

I downloaded a street shapefile from the Census Bureau's TIGER service (http:// tiger.census.gov). A Census tract shapefile was downloaded from CEISIN (http:// sedac.ciesin.org). 

Files in hand, I opened ArcExplorer, launched a new project, and used the "add theme" function to bring the three files in. The first beads of sweat began to form when I tried to view all three themes at once. When viewing the street and Census-tract themes, I could not add the precinct theme. Or, when viewing the precinct theme, I could not add streets and tracts to the view. 

## Glitches 

Which brings me to the second moral of the story: Always check the projections of Continued on page three 

2


# Continued from page two: Lessons 

your digitized maps. After wailing to the NICAR listserv, I was instructed to check the metadata of each map to make sure the pro- jections matched. Sure enough, the precinct map was in a different projection than the street and tract maps. This is a potential pit- fall that Andy Lehren spent a fair amount of time hammering into our heads at the NICAR seminar, but I guess it took a real- life example to drive the point home. In any case, ArcView can convert projec- tions, but ArcExplorer cannot (and won't let you add the necessary conversion extensions), so the county converted the precinct map projection and shipped me the new shapefile. All three themes now could be seen at once: precinct boundaries, census tracts, and be- neath them both, streets. The next step was to pour the demo- graphic into the Census-tract map. This re- quired joining a table of demographics to the table underlying the tract shapefile in ArcExplorer. I bummed a MapInfo CD of 1996 Census-tract demographics from our marketing department and moved the se- lected records to an Excel sheet. To make the join, I had to modify the short tract ID num- bers (e.g., 2.01) in Excel to match the longer ID contained in ArcExplorer tract shapefile (e.g., 080410002.01). 

Finding the neighborhoods where the drop was most dramatic would steer us to the kind of people we needed to talk to. 

I saved the table as a .dbf file, closed it and used the "add table" function in ArcExplorer to open it. More problems. For reasons still unknown, the lengthened tract ID numbers on the Excel sheet did not sur- vive the transition to a table within ArcExplorer. Again I ran to the NICAR list, where I was advised to move the Excel data 

to Access, export the table from Access as a .dbf file, then pick up the table with ArcExplorer. This worked. I used the same routine to move the precinct voting num- bers into ArcExplorer. 

In ArcExplorer, I joined the voting-num- bers table to the table underlying the pre- cinct shapefile, and the demographic table to the table underlying the Census-tract shapefile. This was the point where ArcExplorer could start doing its job. 

## Results 

Now that the demographic numbers were a part of each census tract's record in the shapefile, we could identify the tracts with the greatest concentration of, say, school-age kids. The ones with the highest concentra- tions were indicated by, say, vertical lines. 

And now that the vote-swing numbers were part of each precinct's record in the shapefile, the precincts with the biggest swings against the bond issue could be indi- cated with a color. Precincts where the swing was less dramatic appeared in successively lighter shades of the color. This is quick, point-and-click stuff. 

Looking at both themes - demographics (lines) on top of vote swing by precinct (color), - we were able to produce this story nut: "A Gazette computer-assisted analysis shows that [the] steep drop in support was spread across the district. Perhaps surpris- ingly, the reversal was evident in precincts on the northeast and northwest sides, where simple demographics would seem to indicate strong support for schools. Those neighbor- hoods are filled with young families. Median household income is higher - by several thou- sand dollars - than it is countywide. Voter turnout tends to be high." 

We never published a map, but the re- porter was able to zero in on the critical pre- cincts, ask better questions, and force the school district to confront the reality that it has serious credibility issues to deal with in neighborhoods it had counted on. 

Which brings me to the final moral of this story: The effort is worth it. 

Jeff Thomas can be reached by e-mail at jeff@gazette.com 

Mapping Bootcamp: 

This three-day bootcamp will be held in Columbia, Mo., Oct. 20-22. 

Andy Lehren of Dateline NBC and Jennifer LaFleur of the St. Louis Post- Dispatch will teach the basics of mapping, geocoding and spatial analysis using ArcView GIS. 

More information, including registration and hotel details, is available at www.ire.org/training/ oct20. 

3


MAPPING 

# Flood dangers 

Tipsheets: 

"An introduction to mapping as a CAR tool," tipsheet 1159 from the 2000 IRE national conference. 

This tipsheet explains the uses and importance of mapping, and it includes some suggestions for data to map. 

The tipsheet can be downloaded from the IRE Web site at www.ire.org/ resourcecenter. 

Search the tipsheet database, then follow the directions below the abstract for downloading a PDF file. 

## By Ron Nixon 

The Roanoke Times 

Flooding is a way of life in the city of Roanoke. The city has had major floods in 1940, 1972, 1977 and 1985. The last flood was a hundred-year flood causing millions of dollars in damage and costing several lives. In the late 1990's the city decided to enlist the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to relieve the flooding problems. 

The Corps proposed channeling the Roanoke River, which runs through the city and several surrounding localities. The Corps and the city said the project would reduce the amount of flooding by 50 percent. But other localities pulled out of the project say- ing it would provide little benefit in reduc- ing flooding. 

They were right. Using mapping, flooding data and inter- views with flooding experts we were able to show that the city was actually helping to create the very problems that the flood con- trol was trying to fix. Our analysis showed that there were over a thousand properties in the flood plains in the city. 

It's a recipe for disaster that we were only able to show using GIS. 

And despite the numerous floods that have occurred in the last 20 years, more struc- tures continued to be built. Even a new multi- million dollar bio-medical center is slated to be built in the flood plains. 

It's a recipe for disaster that we were only able to show using GIS. Even the city had no idea of just how many structures were in the flood plain. 

The stories prompted dozens of letters to the paper, and local, state and federal officials are beginning to take a closer look at building in the flood plains in Roanoke. Many residents are pushing the city to re- move more structures from the flood plains. Officials from FEMA are also look- ing at the flood plain development in the city. 

This project showed me the power of GIS, but it also showed me that you have to be careful when using the powerful tool. 

I began looking into the flood dangers when three nearby localities pulled out of the flood control project and started moving homes and business out of the flood plains. I asked the city why it wasn't doing the same and how many structures were in the flood plains. They said they did keep a database of buildings in the flood plains, so we began to try and find out for ourselves. 

For a couple hundred dollars, I purchased the building permit database of structures built since the last great flood, and bought digital maps from Federal Emergency Man- agement Agency. 

With help form Andy Lehren at Dateline NBC, I culled the flood plains from the digi- tal maps. I then overlaid the locations of build- ings with maps of the city and the local river. 

I did several interviews and thought I had my story done until I noticed something in the building permit database. It was a struc- ture owned by The Roanoke Times, my em- ployer, but no one had ever heard of it. My analysis showed that it was in the flood plain and had been built fairly recently. I called former employees to see if they knew about it. No one did. Finally, with maps in hand, I drove to the address. I found an empty lot. 

Panicked, I called the city back to find out what was wrong with the data. It took several days, but they finally got back to me and said the address showing a Roanoke Times' owned building in the flood plain was actu- ally a temporary structure that had been put up for a local festival. There were dozens of other address in the building permit data- base like that. The city had no way of show- ing permanent structures in it database; us- ing it, you couldn't tell a sign from a house. 

There goes the story I thought. Then I remembered that a few weeks earlier, I had gotten the city's real estate database. The da- tabase had all permanent structures in it, the year built, type of building, everything I needed to complete the project. The impact of this project is still on-going. 

Ron Nixon can be reached by e-mail at ronn@roanoke.com 

4


## Continued from page one: Census 

22. And ESRI's "Virtual Campus" has online courses in all sorts of GIS topics. Even better, ArcView and its big brother, ArcInfo, are widely used by federal, state and local government agencies. This means a big step forward in meeting your second major need: Acquiring map files. A GIS program like ArcView works by merging data tables, such as you might see in an Excel spreadsheet, with map files which contain the information necessary to draw and label political boundaries, streets, bod- ies of water and other geographic features. Thus, you'll want a collection of map files (which ArcView calls "shapefiles") to cover all the kinds of maps you're likely to need for stories: Census tracts, streets, ZIP codes, elec- tion precincts, police patrol zones, etc. 

Even better, ArcView and its big brother, Arcinfo, are widely used by federal, state and local government agencies. This means a big step forward in meeting your second major need: Acquiring map files. 

## Shapefiles 

Chances are good, though, that most such shapefiles can be had from your local gov- ernment GIS specialist via a public records request. Shapefiles useful for working with older census data, such as 1990 tract maps, also can be downloaded for free from the Census Bureau at www.census.gov/geolwwwl cob or from ESRI's ArcData Online site at wwww.esri.com/datalonline. 

However, the shapefiles for the 2000 cen- sus geography are not yet available. Worse, the Census Bureau indicates it may not be 

until next summer before those shapefiles can be downloaded from the Census site. That's too late for anyone wanting to work with the first wave of data, which will hit in March. Happily, there is another alternative - The Census Bureau's TIGER/Line files, the na- tional map database used by the bureau to create all its maps. The updated 2000 ver- sion of TIGER, the one that will be used to create the official boundaries for all the 2000 census geographic units, is expected to be ready just before that first wave of data is re- leased. 

TIGER doesn't come in the shapefile for- mat that is used by ArcView. But ArcView does have a so-called extension - an add-on script that gives the program additional ca- pabilities - that will translate TIGER files into shapefiles. If you have ArcView, you can practice with the "TIGER Reader" ex- tension now by downloading the 1998 TI- GER files for your state from www.census.gov/ geoltigerline/tl_1998.htmL 

## Different geographies 

One other 2000 Census mapping prob- lem also awaits resolution. It's the question of how different your 2000 census geogra- phy is from the 1990 version, particularly if you want to look at demographic change during the decade. 

State and county boundaries should be the same, but some cities will have annexed ter- ritory during the '90s. Even more likely are changes to census tracts. While most of them will be unchanged, tracts that gained or lost a lot of population may be split or combined. The Census Bureau promises to release "Re- lationship Files" comparing 1990 and 2000 blocks and tracts - but probably not until next summer. 

Rather than wait, you'll want to make your own comparison table for your area once the 2000 geography is set. And that's an- other good task for a GIS. The next IRE and NICAR Census work- shop will be held in College Park, Md., Dec. 9-10. More information, including registra- tion forms and hotel details, is available at www.ire.org/training/censusworkshops.html Steve Doig can be reached by e-mail at steve.doig@asu.edu 

"Reporting Census 2000": http://cronkite.pp.asu.edul census 

Shapefiles can be downloaded from the Census Bureau at www.census.gov/geo/wwwl cob or from ESRI's ArcData Online site at www.esri.com/datalonline. 

You can practice with the "TIGER Reader" extension now by downloading the 1998 TIGER files for your state from www.census.gov/geo/ tigerline/tl_1998.html 

5


MAPPING 

# No boundaries 

For more information: 

MAPS: www.mapping.dk/ 

ArcView: www.esri.com 

Mapinfo: www.mapinfo.com 

Danish Institute for Computer-assisted Reporting (DICAR) www.dicar.org 

The map to the right, created by Dick van Eijk, shows the absolute number of higher medals per municipality that he found for a story on royal decorations. 

## By Jennifer LaFleur 

As mapping skills spread, journalists are plotting data beyond U.S. boundary files. Reporters in Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden and other European countries use GIS (geographic information systems) soft- ware for showing crime incidents, business data or demographic trends. 

St. Louis Post-Dispatch 

At Morgenavisen Jyllands-Posten, Denmark's largest newspaper, journalists Nils Mulvad and Flemming Svith do mapping regularly using a GIS program called MAPS by Denmark- based ESS. Currently, according to Svith, about five people are using mapping in the newsroom. 

Recently, Svith has mapped the wages of municipal employees compared to costs and wages in the private market. His story showed that about 1.4 billion Kroner (about $188 million) were being put in the wrong pock- ets and that about 100,000 employees earned too little. "I could only have done this story using a map, Svith said. 

GIS also speeds up pro- duction, Svith says. "Before, graphics did the maps and you couldn't do any analysis and it took a whole day to create. Now, I can do a map and send it to graphics. We have a lot more maps in the paper now." 

## Netherlands 

Dick van Eijk a reporter and editor with NRC Handelsblad in the Nether- lands also uses mapping in reporting. Some are quicker mapping projects. growing number of maps is not the result of extensive data analy- sis, but not a copy of a map provided by others either. In these cases we receive a data file, e.g. from a government agency, from Eurostat, from the OECD or another orga- nization. This file contains data for every municipality, region of country in a par- 

ticular area. From these data we generate our own thematic maps using mapping software. Some simple calculations may precede the creation of the map, e.g. dividing by num- ber of inhabitants of the area. Sometimes this is done in a spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel), sometimes in the mapping program itself (MapInfo, both on the Mac and on PC)." At NRC Handelsblad there are three people familiar enough with MapInfo and Excel to do mapping - two reporters and one person in the graphics department. Van Eijk says they also do bigger CAR projects using mapping. In April, Van Eijk did a project on royal decorations awarded on Queen's Day. "Typically some 2,000 people a year re- ceive such an award on Queen's Day, and some 2,000 more on other occasions. It turned out that the geographical distribution of these decorations was very uneven. That was remarkable. I had a hunch that this was a structural phenomenon, but I could not Continued on page seven 

Commandeurs en officieren vooral in
 universiteitssteden en rijke gemeenten

Aantal Commandeurs en
 Officieren ter gelegenheid
 van Koninginnedag,
 1996 2000

10

5

1

Coropgrens

gemeente

NRC Handelsblad 280400 / Bron: Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken


6


# Continued from page six: No boundaries 

prove that using one year of data. So this year I analyzed all the royal decorations awarded on Queen's Day since the new law on these decorations in 1996." The new law requires uniform rules in every part of the country for determining who gets awards. "Using five years of data I could show not only that the geographical distribution of royal decorations was very uneven, but I could also prove that this uneven distribution was con- sistent over the years. In some municipalities the number of decorations per head was more than twenty times as high as in others." New journalists are also learning mapping. Peter Verwey, director of the new media de- partment at the School of Journalism in Utrecht, the Netherlands, incorporates ArcView training into digital journalism coursework. Verwey's students used maps to study the relationship between the crime rate in a police district and the money spent on the police force in that district. They also have used maps to look at restaurant inspections in 

Utrecht. 

As CAR has become a more common tool in newsrooms in Europe so have geographical information systems. Will records access issues slow European journalists' ability to do map- ping? Not in Denmark, says Mulvad of Morgenavisen Jyllands-Posten and the chair of the Danish Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting. "The country is divided geographically in lots of ways - postal codes, local authorities, and so on. It's very easy to divide political thinking, income, police solving crimes, pros- titutes, foreigners and so on geographically and put it in a map in the paper," he said. "Actually, because of that and because of the easy way to use maps, we think mapping perhaps will be used before using database managers for a lot of journalists." 

Jennifer LaFleur can be reached by e-mail at jlafleur@postnet.com 

## MAPPING School test scores 

By Seth Hemmelgarn 

San Jose Mercury News 

In California, school funding is tied to schools' performance on standardized tests. Starting with the 1999 scores, each school is given a 1 to 10 ranking. Schools with a 1 are in the bottom 10 percent of the state, and schools with a 10 are in the top 10 percent. 

The state released the data in January. We wanted to map where schools with the highest and lowest ranks were in our county. The only problem was, we had the score for each school, but we didn't have the address. So we got the addresses from the state, and created a dbaseIV file with all of the information we needed. 

After I geocoded the file in ArcView, I used the query wizard to pinpoint the schools with ones and tens. Not surprisingly, most of the highest-ranked schools formed a blob running along the county's western foothills, where millionaires are commonplace. The lowest- ranked schools showed up in a patch on the city's eastside, where incomes are generally lower. 

This was my first official mapping assign- 

ment after I attended NICAR's incredibly worthwhile mapping bootcamp, so I wanted to have somebody else review my work. That's where Carl Neiburger, mapping guru and Mercury News cohort, came in. 

I'd used two different queries to show the highest and lowest ranking schools, which resulted in two different shape (shp) files. Carl suggested selecting all of the ranks - from 1 to 10 - into one shp file. Then, I just eliminated the ranks we didn't need. This meant one less shp file to keep track of. 

Carl also enlisted the help of Nadine Selden, from the paper's marketing research department. Nadine pulled the median in- come for each of our county's Census tracts from Claritas, and Carl included this in the map. The result was a map that not only showed where the high and low-scoring schools were, but what the income ranges in those areas were. 

Seth Hemmelgarn can be reached by e-mail at SHemmelgarn@sjmercury.com 

Mapping Listservs: 

NICAR-L is a busy list (expect 10-20 messages a day) hosted by the National Institute for Computer- Assisted Reporting. 

It's frequented by hundreds of working journalists whose CAR skills range from expert to beginner. To join the list, send this one- line message: SUB NICAR- L firstname lastname to listproc@lists.missouri.edu. 

JAGIS-L: Tom Johnson's JAGIS homepage is at http:/ /online.sfsu.edu/~jagis/. There's a sign-up link there. 

CENSUS-L was started early this year as an offshoot of NICAR-L. Discussion is primarily about the Census, but there may be talk about mapping as well. 

To join, send this one-line message: SUB CENSUS-L to majordomo@nicar.org. 

7


MAPPING 

# Forming a users group 

Past projects and 

investigations of The Columbus Dispatch are available online at www.dispatch.com/news/ speciall 

The stories include: 

"Dividing Lines": The Dispatch investigated the division of Columbus public elementary schools along lines of race, poverty, student achievement, teacher experience, building conditions and educational resources. Published June 25-28, 2000. 

"Appalachia: Hollow Promises": In this five-day series, The Dispatch investigated the Appalachian Regional Commission's spending to find out where the money from the commission was going and why it often bypassed some of the neediest counties in the region. 

Published Sept. 26 - 30, 1999. 

## By Doug Haddix The Columbus Dispatch 

It all started with the self-proclaimed "BAG lady." Media analyst Gwen Brown maps data extensively to promote advertising through direct mail and in "The BAG," a collection of circulars distributed weekly to 700,000 households in central Ohio. Last summer, Gwen suggested the cre- ation of a mapping users group open to all of the local companies under the umbrella of Wolfe Enterprises Inc. In addition to On Target Marketing, the direct marketing arm of the Dispatch Printing Co., the family- owned company's holdings include The Co- lumbus Dispatch and WBNS-TV, the local CBS affiliate. The idea for a GIS users group emerged during a three-day course on using ArcView mapping software. The class included 14 employees from the newsroom, the newspaper's marketing department and the direct marking group. 

Several of the members have used mapping software for years, so they bring a wealth of experience and technical support to those of us in the newsroom who ventured into mapping just a year ago. 

The class diehards formed the nucleus of the GIS users group, whose mission is to share data resources, technical expertise, mapping- related news and ideas about creative uses. Members meet quarterly, rotating among the company sites, and correspond regularly be- tween sessions. 

Several of the members have used map- ping software for years, so they bring a wealth 

of experience and technical support to those of us in the newsroom who ventured into mapping just a year ago. 

Many newsrooms could benefit from be- coming part of a GIS group, whether it in- volves marketing and advertising or other departments at their media company, a more far-flung corporate group such as ours, or a community group of users in local govern- ment and business. 

Already, we've seen numerous benefits: 
Substantial discounts on software and licenses bought at the corporate level with multiple users. 
Professional bonds with mapping ex- perts outside the newsroom who can help trouble-shoot technical problems and assist on enterprise work. Gwen spent several hours in the newsroom looking over data for a project on the Columbus School District and offering ideas on how to map it effectively. Cherie Smith of the marketing department took the same data and ran a regression analysis on it to find the most influential demographic factors in student proficiency test scores. 
The sharing of data that already has been cleaned up and standardized. For example, our marketing department provided a database table of all drug stores in central Ohio with latitudes and longitudes. That enabled us to produce a quick map to run with a business story about an escalating retail war in the Co- lumbus area among the big drug chains. 
Creative brainstorming on tackling up- coming news stories. Our group includes sev- eral people who have worked extensively in analyzing census data; their expertise will be pivotal in helping The Dispatch prepare for the mapping mother lode of demographic data from the 2000 census. 
The sharing of local shape files. 
Connections with other mapping users. Newsroom representatives have attended the quarterly meetings of a local government GIS users group and reported key developments to the Wolfe Enterprises group. 
The sharing of training tips and hand- outs from conferences, such as the mapping boot camp last fall by NICAR and the an- nual IRE convention. 
Involvement in the GIS users group has kept the newsroom on a steady course as we 
Continued on page nine 

8


## Continued from page eight: Users group 

continue to explore the practical uses of mapping software. Think of the group as a local version of the IRE and NICAR list- serves - a source of inspiration, story ideas, trouble-shooting and emotional support. 

## Reporting uses 

Over the past year, The Dispatch has used mapping software on projects as well as daily stories. 

For a series on Appalachia, we determined how much the federal Appalachian Regional Commission had spent in more than 400 eligible counties across 13 states since the agency's creation in 1965, adjusted the fig- ures for inflation, then linked the county to- tals to a color-coded map. It instantly became clear that areas in the poorest parts of Appa- lachia - southeast Ohio, eastern Kentucky and West Virginia - had received a lot less money than many urban areas on the out- skirts of the region in places such as Spartanburg, S.C.; Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, Pa.; Birmingham, Ala.; and Pittsburgh. 

Our newsroom's foray into data mapping at times has felt a bit foreign or obscure, but it has been well worth the investment of time. 

On a smaller scale, when the U.S. Cen- sus Bureau released initial mail response rates for the 2000 census, we downloaded the re- sults by census tract and mapped them on a shape file provided by the agency. Rather quickly, we spotted the census tracts in Co- lumbus with the highest and lowest response rates. With printouts of the map in hand, reporters went to those neighborhoods to find out why residents had been so coopera- tive or so unresponsive. 

Data mapping also enabled reporter Bill Bush to produce a compelling two-day look at property assessments in Franklin County. 

He analyzed 114,000 sales of residential par- cels from 1990-98, calculated the percent- age by which properties were over-assessed or under-assessed based on sale price, and plotted all of those dots on a map. For his base, he downloaded an up-to-date parcel map from the county government's Web site. Bill produced maps of poor neighborhoods that had been over-assessed and wealthier areas that had been under-assessed to sup- port the project's theme of unfair valuations. 

The newspaper's four-day series on dis- parities in Columbus public elementary schools showed us the real strength of ArcView as a reporting tool. Without map- ping software, it would have been tedious if not impossible to spot geographic trends and differences among the city's 88 elementary schools. 

After creating a master Excel spreadsheet file with all of the key data, we saved it as a .dbf table and moved it into the mapping software. Suspicions about differences in in- ner-city schools and those on the district's more affluent outskirts proved to be true in several cases. For example, we mapped the median teacher salary by school and found that the more-experienced, higher-paid teachers generally worked in the middle-class neighborhoods while rookie educators found themselves assigned to the poorest schools in the central city. 

As I edited the stories for the series, I found myself using ArcView in an unex- pected way: as a spot check on school loca- tions. With 88 buildings, it was hard to keep track of which ones are on which side of the city. The electronic map helped me quickly find particular schools and scan the underly- ing data for particular buildings to see whether further context or information was needed in a story. 

As survivors of the first mapping boot camp at NICAR and nearly a year of using ArcView in the newsroom, Bill and I can at- test to the power of mapping software to pro- duce stories that once seemed impossible. 

Our newsroom's foray into data mapping at times has felt a bit foreign or obscure, but it has been well worth the investment of time. Doug Haddix may be reached by e-mail at dhaddix@dispatch.com 

## Tipsheets: 

"MORE Maps for You: Multiuser GIS in Newsroom," tipsheet# 1250 from 2000 IRE national conference. This handout provides a list of reasons and benefits for using mapping software in the newsroom. 

"Mapping as an Investigative Tool: "Do's and don'ts," tipsheet #1223 from 2000 IRE national conference. This handout lists several do's and don'ts for using mapping as an investigative reporting tool. 

The tipsheets can be downloaded from the IRE Web site at www.ire.org/ resourcecenter. 

Search the tipsheet database, then follow the directions below the abstract for downloading a PDF file. 

9


ORGANIZING DATA 

# Naming queries 

Below are some recent projects using mapping. They're available from the IRE and NICAR Resource Center at www.ire.org/ resourcecenter/ 

"Crime in the City," #15637. The Sacramento (Calif.) Bee. This 1998 special report examined thousands of records with extensive mapping to pinpoint the most crime- plagued areas of the city. 

"Sticker Shocked?," #16510. Seattle Times. In this eight-part series, which ran March 5 to 12, 2000, the Times reported on real estate in the Puget Sound area and examined "the gap in value between neighborhoods that have appreciated rapidly and those that haven't and why this is happening." The series examined prices for different neighborhoods, explained the prices, and looked ahead to the future for real estate in that area. 

## By Richard Dalton 

Newsday 

Sometimes it seems I need a Dewey deci- mal system to manage my queries in Microsoft Access. A colleague and I have created more than 260 queries in our current project. So it's es- sential to develop naming conventions to find the right query. It's also important to carefully choose the names of tables, forms, reports and other Access objects. Here are some tips from my- self, reporters and a Microsoft document at http:1/msdn.microsoft.com/LIBRARY/ BACKGRND/HTML/MSDN NAMING.HTM. (I've adapted some of the tips.) Consider using the following format to name queries: [prefixes]tag[Basename] [Qualifier]. (To avoid enclosing your query name in brackets when you refer to it, don't use spaces between words in query names.) 

## Prefixes: 

"ZZ" - Instead of deleting queries (tables, etc.), prefix them with "ZZ" to drop them to the bottom of the list. 
"zq" - Use the prefix "zq" for temporary queries to avoid cluttering your query window. 
- Prefix a query with two underscores ("_") when you're working on it. It will appear at the top of your list. 

Some CAR specialists, including Dan Keating of The Washington Post and Geoff Dougherty of The Miami Herald, use a pre- fix to identify the order in which queries were created. Use an underscore before the num- ber because you can't begin queries with dig- its. Here's a sample from Keating: 

_01 merge and make combined table _02 summary by district _03 summary by district w_pcts. 

"Having them sequenced makes it a lot easier to come back later and figure out what you were doing and why," Keating wrote via e-mail. 

Query Properties: 

Alternatively, you could also use the query 

properties (or description) field instead of the query name field to indicate the order. (see below). Using this method, "NassauTaxe and "NassauAssessments" would appear close together in the query window, even if one was the first query and the other was the 50th. 

## Creation Date: 

You can also sort the queries by the cre- ation date by clicking on the top of the "Cre- ated" column in the query window. 

## Tag: 

After the prefix, you may use a tag to iden- tify whether you're dealing with a table "tbl", or query "qry." More advanced users might identify the query type, ("qsel" for select, "qapp" for append, "qxtb" for crosstab, etc.). 

This naming convention might seem su- perfluous at first. But in some cases, such as selecting a table or query in report Wizard, Access merges queries and tables into one long list. So using the prefixes makes it easier to distinguish tables from queries. 

## Basename: 

This identifies the contents of the query: "accidents," "taxes," etc. David Herzog of the Providence Journal further breaks down the basename into Ge- ography, Content, Time frame, e.g. RIGunDealersWithCriminalRecords1995 1999. 

## Qualifier: 

Qualifiers distinguish basenames that are similar. You might use it to identify the source of the data if you're using similar data from two sources, e.g. "TaxesHuntington 1999 FromAssessor" and "Taxes Huntington1999 FromTaxReceiver." I would also tack on "de- tail" or "summary." You also can indicate whether you've counted or summed up the records. 

If you're focusing on taxes, regardless of location, list "taxes" first in the basename. If you're focusing on given locations for, say, both taxes and property assessments, put the location first. Then you can sort by the loca- tion, and all the queries about taxes and as- sessments for a given location will appear together. 

Continued on page eleven 

10


Continued from page ten: 

# Queries 

Here's an example: 

"qseINYPlaneAcc1990CountByCounty would list airplane accidents in New York in 1990, with a count by county. 

Using the properties field, accessible through "view / properties," you can further elaborate on the contents of query in plain English. You can even list the contact phone numbers of the source of the data, any quirks about the query or table and the initials of 

the reporter who created the query. In the properties box, you also can check the "hidden" box to hide the query you no longer use (instead of prefixing it with "zz"). To view hidden objects, choose "tools / op- tions," click on the "view" tab, and check "Hidden objects" under the "Show" bar. 

Richard Dalton can be reached by e-mail at rdalton@newsday.com 

## BEST OF NICAR-L 

Averaging averages 

Here's a question thrown out by Griff Palmer, of The San Jose Mercury News re- cently: Let's say we've decided to compare vari- ous investment brokerages, based on their associates' scores on a standardized test. At each level of experience, associates are given a different standardized test. For each brokerage, we've got two years' worth of average national percentile rankings for brokers in each experience-level group. We have a reporter who wants to see if she can measure how well each brokerage has improved from 1999 to 2000. She proposes averaging the average scores of all experience groupings for each brokerage; then ranking each brokerage by the averaged average scores. An editor who oversees this area, though, expresses discomfort with the idea of averag- ing average scores to come up with a single indicator for each brokerage. It is easy to dem- onstrate the problems inherent in averaging averages. However, these are the data we have to work with. Anybody want to offer an opinion on pro- ceeding in this fashion? We know the num- ber of associates tested in each experience group, so we could at least weight the aver- ages for each experience group before calcu- lating an overall average. Can anybody suggest a better way of mak- ing year-to-year comparisons of brokerages? Answer from Sarah Cohen, The Washing- ton Post: Others may disagree with me, but I see averaging averages as legitimate (and prefer- able) in some situations. 

The idea is to identify what question you want to ask, then decide whether you can get to the best answer. If you can't, then ad- mit you're getting to the second-best answer. 

I think it depends on the target unit of analysis. In this case, do you care about com- paring the brokers within companies, or com- panies to other companies. 

Here's an example where averaging aver- ages seems right to me: You want to com- pare your city (in crime, for example) or schools (in test scores) or company (in this case) to others, not to the national average or all-student average. 

Weighting the averages (the same thing as having every broker's score) would tell you how, on average, brokers in one company did against brokers in others. But leaving them unweighted tells you how a brokerage did against other brokerages. 

This comes up a lot in comparing crime rates - do you compare your city to the na- tion (weighted) or to other cities/states (unweighted)? They're two different analy- ses - the first is whether residents of your city are more or less likely to be robbed or something than in the nation as a whole. The second tells you whether your city is doing any better/worse than other cities. If you weighted it, you'd end up just comparing your city to Los Angeles and New York be- cause they're so big. 

Extreme values can affect either one, de- pending on whether they occur in smaller places or larger places. So I'd consider check- ing them against medians or geometric means as well. 

Below are some recent projects using mapping. They're available from the IRE and NICAR Resource Center at www.ire.org/ resourcecenter/ 

The Air We Breathe, #15491. The Record (Hackensack, N.J.). An analysis of EPA data showed that New Jersey had a high level of toxic chemicals in the air. The 1999 report included maps of hazardous chemical concentrations and gave small tips for maintaining air quality. 

College Community Crime Risk, #16337. APB Online. This 1999 report analyzed the crime risk in U.S. college communities, complete with risk maps and ratings. The authors used GAO reports and Department of Education investigative reports. 

Other messages on the topic of "Averaging averages" can be found by searching the NICAR-L archives at www.ire.org/ datalibrary/nicarl.html 

11


ACCESS REPORTS 

# Creating a 'rap sheet' 

The findings that reporter Caitlin Francke detailed in a January series were sobering: less than 25 percent of those charged with gun crimes received the five-year sentence. third of the handgun cases were dropped before trial, often because witnesses disappeared and prosecutors made little effort to find them. Worse yet, only a handful of the guilty wound up with handgun crimes on their records. 

A copy of the story will soon be available in the IRE Resource Center. 

Search the database at www.ire.org/resourcecenter 

## By Mike Himowitz 

The Sun 

With 300 homicides a year and many more shootings, armed robberies, rapes and assaults, Baltimore has one of the highest rates of handgun crime in the nation. 

Many of its criminals are repeat offenders with long records; yet Maryland has one of the toughest handgun laws in the country. Pull a pistol during a crime and you're sup- posed to get five years in prison without pa- role - no ifs, ands or buts. Repeat offenders are supposed to get even longer sentences. 

Obviously, the system wasn't working. To find out why, we obtained 27 months of criminal records from Baltimore City Cir- cuit Court and began one of the most com- plex computer-assisted projects we've at- tempted. 

## Sorting through the muddle 

Given the variables that go into crime and punishment, sentencing projects are fraught with statistical peril. We spent months rif- fling through the data, trying to make sure we were getting the right picture. Eventually we got Microsoft Access to sort through the muddle and generate reports that enabled 

ing complex data and presenting it to report- ers, editors and ultimately, our readers. 

I'm not going to turn this into a how-to manual for would-be report makers. If you're tolerably good at constructing queries in Access, you can learn to construct simple re- ports in a day or two. Instead, this piece is designed to convince you that it's worth your while to give it a try. 

## Reports 

What makes a report different than run- ning a query and hitting the PRINT but- ton? 

It's all in how you look at it. A report is a presentation based on information in a query, a table or even a form. Reports are inher- ently visual they're designed for printed out- put and can be simple or fancy. Unlike que- ries, reports give you complete control over data placement, typefaces and even graph- ics. If you design a report properly, the in- formation can jump off the page. 

At the quick-and-dirty level, you can use reports to distribute information to the staff in a hurry. For example, when Maryland re- leased school test scores in December, we im- ported the data into Access and turned out de- 

Anne Arundel County 3rd Grade Reading Scores This table shows the percentage of students in each school who scored satisfactory in Maryland MSPAP reading tests since 1994. The last column shows improvement or decline from 1994 to 1999. 



1999	1998	1997	1996	1995	1994	Change
Maryland	41.2	41.6	36.8	35.3	34.0	30.6	10.6
Countywide	47.8	46.7	43.9	44.3	40.4	37.8	10.0
Annapolis	19.6	35.7	12.8	44.4	40.0	25.6	-6.0
Amold	51.6	61.5	59.3	69.4	56.7	51.7	-0.1
Belle Grove	38.5	13.2	37.9	48.0	25.0	21.9	16.6
Belvedere	64.5	60.2	51.0	45.6	57:4	48.1	16.4
Benfield	82.9	78.3	64.2	68.3	71.2	63.3	19.6
Bodkin	75.7	55.8	52.1	52.5	47.4	41.9	33.8
Broadneck	57.0	72.7	55.1	50.5	52.0	56.8	0.2
Brock Bridge	35.8	42.5	41.8	36.0	17.2	47.8	-12.0



Page 2 of 33 

Caitlin Francke to document the cases of hundreds of violent criminals who escaped the serious punishment the law envisioned. 

While most of us are familiar with Access tables and queries, we often overlook or ig- nore the program's superb reporting tools. To the uninitiated, they smack of those "Sales by month and department" tables that pop up in corporate earnings statements. But reports pro- vide a critical, third-level approach to analyz- 

trees and gave reporters in competitive situa- tions an early start on their stories. 

tailed reports for each county and the entire metro area, with lists sorted by school name, reading scores, math scores and over- all performance. We posted the reports on our network PDF files, which saved a few 

But a report is more than a pretty face on a query. Unlike queries, which can display lists of detailed data or summary tables, a report can display both simultaneously. It can also organize data on multiple levels. For ex- ample, a single report can summarize a candidate's political contributions by ZIP code on one line, display individual contri- 

Continued on page thirteen 

12


# Continued from page twelve: 'Rap sheet' 

butions by donor and date below that, and then total each contributor's payments. 

## Handgun project 

For our handgun project, we started with the court system's proprietary database, a monolithic text file that contained data from 30 different tables, some of which had more than 800,000 records. The court's adminis- trators were cooperative, but they told us flatly that there was no way we could turn the data into a relational database. We did, of course, using old-fashioned BASIC programming to slice the data into chunks that Access could import as tables. From these we learned that prosecutions were organized around the "case:" a particular crime such as a liquor store holdup, for which a defendant has been charged. There were more than 40,000 cases, each consisting of multiple counts. The counts are individual charges, each numbered and titled according to the criminal code, such as rob- bery, attempted murder, assault or use of a handgun in the commission of a crime. Each count, it turned out, was linked to a particular disposition, including the plea, verdict and sentence. Sentences were in turn divided into time to be served, time sus- pended and probation. Some of these sen- tences were concurrent, others consecutive. Worse yet, sentences were recorded in the "xxDxxMxxY" format, so that a sentence of 5 years, 3 months and 15 days would appear as "05Y03M15D." Not exactly arithmetic- friendly. To complicate matters further, a single crime with multiple victims can generate sev- eral cases. During plea bargaining, those cases are usually consolidated, so that a defendant pleads guilty to only one or two counts from a single case. The rest are dropped. Prosecutors and defense lawyers also con- solidate unrelated cases against the same de- fendant at a single hearing because it's more convenient for them. 

## Developing a rap sheet 

So how do you make sense of it all? 

It was easy to search for handgun counts and their dispositions, and that's what we did first. What we found confirmed what pros- 

ecutors and defense lawyers had told the re- porter anecdotally. In all but a tiny fraction of the cases, the handgun charge was dropped in plea bargaining. But that didn't tell the whole story. In fact, to courthouse veterans, this behavior is per- fectly normal. So we had to switch gears and analyze what happened to each defendant who was charged with a handgun count as part of any case. That meant calculating the total sen- tence for all charges in all cases (minus sus- pended time). From that, we developed a list of defendants who got less than the mini- mum time, or no time at all. Finally, it was time to see what happened to each of them. This is where Access' report functions came in. Based on a query that linked four tables (defendants, cases, charges and dispo- sitions), we developed a "rap sheet" report for each defendant that showed exactly what happened to each count in each case, orga- nized in a fashion that made it possible to identify plea bargains and sort out consoli- dated cases. Now, armed with statistical summaries and examples from hundreds of individual cases, Francke talked to prosecutors, defense attorneys, judges and victims. What she found was a court system overwhelmed by sheer numbers. With too many bad guys and too little support, prosecutors were dismissing any questionable case and settling for bargain- basement pleas in many more. As a result, even those who got more than the minimum five-year sentence rarely wound up with convictions for use of a hand- gun on their records. The next time, they appear in court (and history shows that many will be back), the system won't mark them as a repeat handgun offender, and their lawyers will be free to bargain once again. As part of the reporting process, Francke gave copies of our reports to prosecutors and judges. Most had never seen that kind of analysis before. And though our series was highly critical of the way they conducted their offices, none of them challenged our statisti- cal conclusions. 

## IRE Bookstore 

Mike Himowitz can be reached by e-mail at mike.himowitz@baltsun.com 

To steer your CAR projects in the right direction, order "Computer-Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide," by Brant Houston. It can be ordered from IRE and NICAR for $25 for IRE members or $30 for non- members plus shipping. Call (573) 882-2042 to order. 

Other books available from the IRE Bookstore: 

1999 Uplink Collection, a bound edition of the 1999 issues of Uplink; $35 for IRE members, $50 for non- members. 
100 Computer-Assisted Investigations; $20 for IRE members, $25 for non- members. 
"Covering Aviation Safety:An Investigator's Guide," $15 for IRE members, $20 for non- members. 

More books and other items can be ordered through the IRE Web site, www.ire.org/store/ 

13


More about the reporting of the "Rampage Killers" story is featured in this month's issue of the IRE Journal. 

# Killers 

"Rampage Killers" is available in the IRE Resource Center, story #16521. To order a copy, call (573) 882-3364. 

Continued from page one: 

began that we try to get a better handle on the atrocities that were just beginning to be re- ported by refugees at the province's borders. 

The Times' database team - at the time comprised of Josh Barbanel and me - sug- gested we take the reports, which the research department was pulling from the wires and Web sites of human rights groups and gov- ernments, and parse them into a few simple but useful fields. Josh designed a Lotus Notes application that would allow a clerk to input the important fields. 

It showed how you can speak with authority when you let computer tools help you manage and distill large amounts of information. 

Within a few days, we had 200 records in that database, and could analyze it based on the source of report, the location of the atroc- ity, and the details. We were able to show, when Kosovo was still being purged, that there was a geographical pattern to the Serbs' actions. 

## Selling CAR 

We were in the midst of a "campaign" to sell computer-assisted reporting to the news- room that Terry Schwadron, the editor of research and technology, had launched last year. Josh's Kosovo database became a para- digm for Times editors to think about how to apply computer assistance to reporting projects. In late summer, Dean Baquet, the national editor, came to me with the idea of establishing our own database of explosive public murder, and use it to unravel the ap- parent epidemic of school and workplace shootings in America over the last few years. 

I set up a Lotus Notes application, with consulting help from George Landau of NewsEngin. I've been doing computer-as- sisted reporting for 15 years, and I've man- aged databases on PCs with, in turn, 

KnowledgeMan, Q&A, Alpha4, FoxPro and Access. This is my formula for migrating to Lotus Notes: Take everything you have learned and throw it out the window. 

Using Notes 4.6 to create a Web applica- tion only made the learning process steeper and less intuitive, because, George explained, it wasn't optimized for that task. That's why they created version 5.0. But the people who run computer systems for the business side of The Times supported 4.6. And aside from Josh's experiments, news technology, where I work as a reporter, had no experience with Notes. (At one point, in frustration, I stormed in to Terry's office and demanded that he assign someone with technical skills to learn Notes so we could get this now slow- moving project going, and his answer, essen- tially, was: "OK. You.") 

Nevertheless, Notes was the right way to go, for a database with limited records that amounted to a kind of hybrid between a text database and a formal parsed database. With Notes, I set up a form that the reporters used to record information into 90 fields. Fox Butterfield, one of the reporters on the project, liked to be able to paste huge sections of text into the form, and Notes allowed me to in- clude text fields of nearly unlimited length. Notes' ability to handle multiple answers in a single field also was important. Over about three months, we entered information about the victims, the guns, the warning signs, the men- tal health histories, as well as demographics. 

One of my jobs at The Times is to spread computer skills. On this project, I was al- ways torn between developing applications for the Web and trying to get someone to learn, say, Excel, so they could creatively pose and test their own hypotheses with the data. Ultimately, I developed six or seven canned Web-page views so the reporters could sort various fields on the Web. I didn't spread many CAR skills that way, but I did spread enthusiasm. 

## Analysis 

My analysis was pretty straightforward, and accomplished simply by sorting the views. A view in Notes allows you to specify which fields you want to display across a page, and gives you some ability to sort the records, 

Continued on page fifteen 

14


Killers Continued from page fourteen: 

just like a spreadsheet. To know how many cases in which an offender had previously been institutionalized, I'd call up the view that included the mental health variables, click to sort the "PrevHosp" column, and count the "Y's". With only 100 records, that was perfectly satisfactory and manageable. 

It became clear in the research department that it would be impossible to use newspa- per databases to develop a full picture of these crimes. Too many would slip through the cracks, especially in early years. We would not be able to develop prevalence, so we con- centrated on putting together as many as possible that fit the description of multiple victims, in a public place, not connected to a robbery or domestic strife. We would ac- knowledge that this wasn't a sample or an entire population, and go with 100 cases. 

We were able to show that our group was vastly different from the one that criminal justice institutions were used to handling. 

We've been asked many times, by crimi- nologists, psychiatrists and people who par- ticipated in the Web forums, to publish the entire database. But at this point, largely for proprietary reasons (we might write some more stories using the data), we've decided not to do so. 

To get at the issues of prevalence and trend that went unanswered by our 100-killer da- tabase, I tried an analysis of FBI homicide reports, using some more usual database tools on that piece of quantifying. I downloaded the data files - 15,000 to 22,000 murders a year going back to 1976 - from a University of Michigan site (www.icpsr.umich.edu/ NACJD/ucr.html). NICAR sells them as well, and it might be a good idea to get them all from one place. I had to buy the most recent year from NICAR, and the formats were dif- ferent, which was an additional headache. 

It took a few weeks of sorting through the data, and reading the criminology pa- pers that had used them, to figure out if we could make the data work for trend analysis of rampage murder. The data are not collected in a way that makes this easy, but perhaps that's not surprising. They are rare crimes, and only recently had events suggested the need for a census of them. 

I used SPSS to isolate murders with three or more victims, and classified them into three groups: Armed robbery or gang kill- ings; familicide, in which the principal vic- tim was a family member; and non-robbery, non-family murder. I ran crosstabs by year, and copied the results to an Excel spread- sheet to create charts. There were only about two to three dozen events in each category each year. They varied from year to year, as rare events often do. 

I used yearly population estimates to cal- culate rates, and it was immediately clear that one of the groups had jumped in the 1990s rampage killings. Was it significant? I tested them for a linear trend, and there was no signifi- cant one for the entire period, 1976 to 1997. 

Josh suggested an independent-samples t- test to compare the years before and after 1990, and the increase, about 30 percent, was significant at the p<.01 level. The test tells you if the means of two groups are signifi- cantly different, taking into account the vari- ability and number of cases. 

To illustrate how these killers were differ- ent from regular murderers, I also grabbed a couple of great datasets from the Michigan site: A survey of inmate populations that al- lowed me to calculate education, employ- ment, and military background for regular murders; and the National Crime Victimiza- tion Survey, from which I could get the time of day most regular crimes happen. 

We were able to show that our group was vastly different from the one that criminal justice institutions were used to handling. They're whiter, older, better educated but less fully employed. They're much more likely to have a military background, kill in the morn- ing and make no plan of escape. 

Ford Fessenden can be reached by e-mail at fordfess@nytimes.com 

## Uplink story ideas 

Have you or one of your colleagues recently published a story using CAR that has not been done before or involved particularly difficult data work? 

Do you know of a technical problem (or its solution) that others may like to hear about? 

Or is there some issue or beat that we haven't covered? 

If you have a story idea, we'd like to hear from you. Please contact managing editor Maryjo Sylwester either by e-mail at maryjo@nicar.org or by phone at (573) 884-7711. 

15


# Bits, Bytes and Barks 

## FECinfo offer 

IRE members can now receive a very discounted sub- scription rate to FECinfo's enhanced campaign finance data site. The subscription to FECInfo Pro enables you to re- search and extract highly specialized reports and informa- tion on the sources of federal political contributions. 

This rate is going to news organizations for $2,500 a year. But as an IRE member, you can receive the same year- long subscription for $150. This offer is good though Dec. 31, 2000. More infor- mation is available at www.ire.org/fecinfo 

## NICAR data updates 

The NICAR Database Library has updated the INS Legal Residency Data for fiscal years 1997 and 1998, and the Federal Procurement Database for fiscal year 1999 - the most current data available for both datasets. 

The Federal Procurement Database, which is from the U.S. General Services Administration, includes all federal contracts worth more than $25,000. 

NICAR has data for each fiscal year, 1992-1999. Cost for one fiscal year, entire United States, is $150, $175, $200 based on news organization size. A single state slice of one fiscal year costs $50, $75 or $100. Data for all years, entire United States, cost $325, $375, $425. 

More information, including sample data, is available at www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/fedcontacts/ 

The Legal Residency data, from the Immigration and Naturalization Service, includes characteristics of aliens granted permanent residence in the United States. Names 

and exact addresses are redacted under the Privacy Act. 

More information, including sample data, is available at www.nicar.org/data/ins/ 

Cost for each fiscal year is $40 for circulation below 50,000 or 50-200 market; $50 for circulation 50,000 to 100,000 or 25-50 market; $60 for circulation over 100,000 or top 25 market. Prices for all years are $125, $150 and $175, based on size of news organization. To order, call the database library at (573) 884-7711. 

## Upcoming bootcamps 

Here's the schedule for IRE and NICAR basic bootcamps during the upcoming year. These bootcamps offer hands-on training in Microsoft Excel and Access, as well as tips on search- ing for information and importing data from the Web. 

More information, including registration and hotel de- tails, is available at www.ire.org/training/bootcamps.html 

November 12-17, 2000 St. Petersburg, Fla., at The Poynter Institute January 7-12, 2001 Columbia, Mo. March 25-30, 2001 - Columbia, Mo. May 20-26, 2001 Columbia, Mo. July 15-20, 2001 - Columbia, Mo. August 5-10, 2001 I Columbia, Mo. 

An advanced bootcamp on statistics will also be held at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, May 13-17, 2001. This bootcamp features hands-on train- ing in statistics and SPSS. 

"OW 987 ON LIWELI AIR "S'N WHOLL-NON 

11559 OW JO looyps unossiw JO yon 8EI "Oul pue 