July
August 2002
 Volume Number&4

Published bimonthly by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
 www.nicar.org


Bits & Bytes 



Training in Savannah Investigative Reporters and Edi- tors will offer computer-assisted reporting training during its re- gional conference in Savannah, Ga., Oct. 19-20. The hands-on CAR workshop will be 9 a.m. to noon Sunday, Oct. 20. There will be a limited number of registra- tion slots open for the basic skills workshop. The investigative re- porting sessions on Saturday will spotlight nut-and-bolts reporting skills and hot issues in the South. 

For updated information on speakers and the conference schedule, go to www.ire.org/ training/savannah02/ 

## Data updates: 

The IRE and NICAR Database Library recently updated the fol- lowing databases: 

Federal spending 

The Consolidated Federal Funds Report database, current as of fiscal year 2001, is a valuable tool for exploring federal expenditures in detail. Using the data, collected by the U.S. Census Bureau, jour- nalists can look at federal assis- tance and overlay that informa- tion with demographics and housing about counties and cit- ies. The database shows how 



# RITALIN ROULETTE State data pinpoints drug use by ZIP code By Mark Skertic, Chicago Sun-Times 

continued on page 2 

The story sounded so simple when my editor gave me the assignment: Do something on the amount of Ritalin and similar drugs used in the Chicago area to treat children for attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 

It turned out to be a months-long effort that involved the first time an Illinois 

newspaper using data from the state's prescription-monitoring pro- gram. Of course, when I got the as- signment I didn't realize Illinois even collected the data. 

Seventeen other states have similar programs - California, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, Massachusetts, 

continued on page 18 

SPOTLIGHT: CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

# Covering money, votes and power 

By Aron Pilhofer, IRE's Campaign Finance Information Center 

Campaign finance has been big news of late, whether it's the gushing gener- osity of Enron executives, the major parties' insatiable appetite for soft money or the rise of millionaire candi- dates funding $100 million campaigns. 

And this fall comes the main event: On Nov. 6, the Bipartisan Campaign Re- form Act - the first major overhaul of the federal campaign finance system in a quarter century - will kick in. 

Although the new law only applies to federal candidates and committees, it 

## SPOTLIGHT: 

FOR MORE ON CAMPAIGN FINANCE SEE: 

Data can help profile a candidate's street machine, p. 8 
Looking at the spending side of the ledger, p. 10 
Boot Camp boosts campaign reporting, p. 11 
Working with FEC electronic filing data, p. 13 
TECH TIP: Setting up an automated FTP download, p. 15 

continued on page 17


IRE Ortebase Library 573.884.7711 

Bits & Bytes continued from page 1 





much money the federal gov- ernment has spent. It covers federal expenditures or obliga- tions for the following catego- ries: grants, salaries and wages, procurement contracts, direct payments to individuals, other direct payments, direct loans, guaranteed or insured loans, and insurance. 

## Federal contracts 

The federal contracts database provides details about more than 560,000 contracts, including the dollar amount, contracting agency and the type of product or service involved. The data- base contains information about each federal contract worth more than $25,000. For a few ideas about using the database see page 9. 

## Uniform Crime Reports 

The FBI Uniform Crime Reports database is now current through 2000. Most of the data consists of the "index" crimes: murder, non-negligent man- slaughter, forcible rape, rob- bery, aggravated assault, bur- glary, larceny/theft, motor-ve- hicle theft and arson. 

In addition, the database pro- vides details about property crimes and includes the dollar values of the crimes. Additional data show age, sex and race in- formation of people arrested. 

The Supplemental Homicide Re- port table provides more detailed information on homicides, includ- ing demographic information about the victim and offender. 

To order databases, contact NICAR at 573-884-7711, or go to www.ire.org/datalibrary/da tabases/for more information. 

CENSUS UPDATE 

# As SF3 data flows, preparation still key 

By Jeff Porter, IRE and NICAR 

The U.S. Census Bureau's early mis- steps in the summer release of data show that even the agency itself can have trouble with the numbers. 

So journalists, beware. 

On June 25, the agency began releas- ing state-by-state Summary File 3 data 

"We have identified a potential problem with the Summary File 3 (SF-3) data files for the state of Vermont that the Census Bureau planned to release July 10, 2002. In accordance with our long-standing commitment to quality, we are postpon- ing the release of all SF-3 files until we know whether any corrections or revi- sions are required. As we continue our 

C:lsflascii)dir X ufi

Volune in drive € has no label
 Volume Serial Number is 1057-18CE
 Directory of C:\sflascii

DEGEO
UF1
8,161,404 03-13-01 12:04p degeo uf
 DECOCC1
UF
9.813.749 09-13-01 12:05p de00001 ufi
 2 file(s)
17,975,153 bytes
 O dir(s)
134.721.536 bytes free

C:lsf1ascii>rename uf1 txt

C:\sflascij>dir .txt

Volume in drive C has no label
 Volume Serial Number is 1057-18CE
 Directory of C:\sflascii

DE00001 TXT 9,313,749 03-13-01 12:05p de00091 txt
 DEGEO
TXT 8,161,404 03-13-01 12:04p degeo. txt
 2 file(s)
17 975.153 bytes
 I dir(s)
13% .321.536 bytes free

C;\sflascii>


DOS commands to rename files 

- from the 2000 Census long form filled out by one of six households - starting with Vermont. 

It became clear, though, that the data didn't correspond with a series of speci- fications or structure tables provided by the Census Bureau for users of Microsoft Visual FoxPro or Access da- tabase software. So the information didn't flow in correctly, creating angst for Census reporters. The bureau pulled back the data files, edited the specifications and structure tables then re-released the data on July 5. 

Then it happened again. On the day the bureau's embargo was lifted, July 10, the agency reported: 

review of these files, we will establish and issue a revised schedule for their release that allows us sufficient time to ensure the data's accuracy." 

## A data primer 

The data files, finally released and a schedule that now might stretch later in the year than first intended, are mas- sive. All told, the Summary File 3 release includes 813 detailed tables of Census 2000 social, economic and housing char- acteristics. A total of 484 tables address population; 329 address housing infor- mation. Then there's one more: a ge- ography table, simply identifying for each record the level of geography, the name and codes of those geographic areas. For example, it might identify 

2


July August 2002


Uplink


one record as the state of Vermont with the code "50." So that makes 814 tables. 

An impossible task? Not at all, in part because of the Access database speci- fications and the FoxPro and other structure tables that were problematic in the first release but were lifesavers when they were corrected. 

First, the Census Bureau combined many of the tables down to a much more manageable collection of 76 data files, plus the geography table. So in- stead of 814 files to deal with, a journal- ist can take 77 files and find story after story, either national or local in scope. 

## Data, stories galore 

Journalists can go back to the Census trough time after time to find or strengthen stories. The Census, after all, is simply counting people, their houses, their dollars. More than just Census stories live in the data. (For specific examples, see the related story in the Uplink May-June 2002 edition.) 

But before one can pursue a story, one must pick up the data. Since most of the computer-assisted reporting world operates on Microsoft Access, let's fo- cus on that. 

To find a Summary File 3 Access 97 database with the corrected specifica- tions, go to www.census.gov/support/ SF3ASCII.html and download the Ac- cess file. If you're using a newer ver- sion, you can simply tell your computer to convert the Access database to the correct version. 

Now, where's the data? Assuming you have a media password (or if your state's embargo is already lifted) go to ftp://ftp2.census.gov/census_2000/ datasets/Summary_File_3/ for the FTP version or www2.census.gov/cen- sus_2000/datasets/Summary_File_3/ for an only slightly prettier Web inter- face to download the data. 

With a caveat: Even on the late July data release, the bureau erred on the structure of the geography table, which 

is needed to tie specific Census num- bers to a geographic area. Luckily, the geography table structure is the same item used in the earlier releases of Census data, so you can simply down- load the geography table specifications from the earlier release of Summary File 1 from www.census.gov/support/ SF1ASCll.html. 

## Census files into Access 

You'll need to unzip all those com- pressed files and, if you're an Access user, you might need to rename the text files. They all end with the suffix ",uf3." To change that suffix into ".txt" so that the software will recognize the files, visit the same Web page, where you can review the DOS procedure using the rename command. 

Once that's accomplished, you can use the Access database you downloaded earlier with these simple steps (found at www.census.gov/support/SF1ASCII .html#Microsoft Access procedures, complete with screenshots). 

Click "File," "Get External Data," then "Import" from menu 
Select text file and click on the "Import" button 
Click on the "Advanced" button 
Click on the "Specs" button 
Select matching import specification and click on the "Open" button 
Click on the "OK" button 
Select option to store data in a new table or in an existing table (then select matching table), then click on the "Next" or "Finish" button. If you choose an existing table, you're finished. That's highly recommended. 
If not, highlight updated table and then click on the Design button 
Right click on field LOGRECNO and then select "Primary Key" 

## Finding the geography 

The field LOGRECNO is the key way to link to the geography table. That table is important not only because it identifies by name the state, county or tract, but it helps you decide which places to examine and how to add them up. For example, there's a field called GEOCOMP. That stands for "Geographic Component," a number 

code, which includes not only entire areas such as counties, but smaller areas within a county the urban area, the rural area, and so on. So if you want to count all the people in a specific county, then you'll want to filter the records to only include GEOCOMP number "00." That's the code to include everything, not specific geographic component types. 

To find detailed information on each of those geographic table fields, go to www.census.gov/support/GeoFile.html for general information then dive into details at http://www2.census.gov/cen- sus_2000/datasets/Summary_File_ download the file "0SF3_geo_header.doc." While you're there, also download and read, if you haven't already, the file 0README_S 0SF3_File_Structure.doc" and "0SF3_table_matrix.doc." 

Jeff Porter can be reached by e-mail at jeff@nicar.org 

## readme.txt 

Web addresses 

In addition to the Web pages listed in the accompanying article, these can help a journalist to understand and use the Census data: 

## www.2000census.org 

Investigative Reporters and Editors offers training opportunities, tipsheets and helpful links. 

http://cronkite.pp.asu.edu/census/ Created by Steve Doig, Knight Chair in Journalism for Arizona State University, who specializes in computer-assisted reporting. The Web site helps journalists and others make good use of Census data. 

## www.censusscope.org 

An easy-to-use tool for investigating U.S. demographic trends, from the Social Science Data Analysis Network at the University of Michigan. 

July August 2002


3


visit 

# MAPPING 

This Uplink feature shows the latest uses of mapping in news reporting. 

## Plotting political moves 

It's the political season - a great time to hunt for stories that show your readers and viewers the pockets of political power in your area. A num- ber of journalists have turned to geo- graphic information system (GIS) software to visualize campaign con- tributors and election results and find stories that otherwise might have been hidden inside tables of data. 

## Results and turnout 

In early May, The Star-Ledger in Newark, N.J., mapped the results for the primary election race between in- cumbent Mayor Sharpe James and challenger Cory Booker, a city coun- cilman. Using ArcView, CAR special- ist Robert Gebeloff created a the- matic map that showed the areas taken by each and by what margin. (See Map 1). For the analysis, Gebeloff mapped a polygon file showing the city voting districts and shaded the layer with four colors that displayed the victory margin percent- age for each candidate. Graphic art- ist Angela Porter took the informa- tion generated by Gebeloff and cre- ated a map for publication. The vot- ing district files came from the U.S. Census Bureau and had to be ed- ited to reflect redistricting changes. 

The day after the election, Gebeloff dug deeper and used ArcView to show how voter turnout contributed to the mayor's primary triumph. He recycled the voting district map and this time shaded it with just two col- ors: one for the districts won by 

Mapping James' win
 Here's a geograph cal look et how Mayor Sharpe
 James tared yesterday against his primary competitor
 Councilment Sory-Booker
Braron Brook Park

Brake any 1/3 prem B stamp
 Beniber 35 '5+15 asset
 Ameri tree #m L percent
 Annualy To arrord or can

1 prev: for


Map 1 

James and another for the districts taken by Booker. Gebeloff next over- laid another copy of the voting dis- trict polygon file and displayed it as a density map that created a dot for every 20 voters casting ballots in the election. The map (See Map 2) showed that James fared well and drew a large turnout in the city's most densely populated wards, while Booker failed to generate as high a turnout in the areas he won. 

## Race and recall 

Reporters at the Flint (Mich.) Jour- nalused analytic mapping for a Feb- ruary story about the petition drive to secure a recall election of the city's black mayor. A team of three report- ers spent weeks entering into an Excel spreadsheet key pieces of in- formation, including the names and addresses of the 13,000 people who signed recall petitions. Mary Ann Chick Whiteside, the new media manager at the paper, plotted those addresses in Maplnfo, using the MapMarker geocoding tool to cre- ate a point for each address. She manually created voter precinct maps in Mapinfo, using a paper map as a guide. Then, with both layers open in Maplnfo, she as- signed the precinct number to each signer of the petition. 

Finally she analyzed the petitioner data and the results were telling: more than 70 percent of the 10,000 valid sig- natures came from predominantly white neighborhoods. Less than 10 percent of the valid signatures came from predominantly black neighbor- hoods. (See the story on the Web at www.mlive.com/news/fljournal/ lindex.ssf?/fljournal/special/stories/ recall_2.html). After the reporters confronted recall leaders with the re- sults of the analysis, the leaders ad- mitted that they had targeted white neighborhoods for their drive. 

6


July August 2002


Uplink


VOTER TURNOUT
 Each dot represents
 20 people who voted
 Areas won by James
 Areas won by Booker
North Ward
 Winner undetermined

West Ward

Control Ward

South Ward

East Ward


Map 2 

## Mapping contributions 

The Center for Responsive Politics used GIS to take a look at the source of 1999 presidential candidate con- tributions. Using Maptitude, the cen- ter created for each state a trio of three-dimensional maps showing the population of every ZIP Code and the amount of contributions to Demo- cratic candidates and Republican candidates. The maps clearly showed that the contribution patterns often failed to mirror population pat- terns. You can see the maps on the Web at www.opensecrets.org/states/ presmap.asp. 

## Election Machine 

Any journalist who's interested in mapping election results should check out the Election Machine package developed by Neil Reisner of the Miami Daily Business Review. IRE and NICAR have made it avail- able for download at www.nicar.org/ electmach/index.html. 

The Election Machine provides the 

Search 

Identify 

tools you need to jumpstart your election coverage using GIS. You'll find Access, Excel and ArcView files and a PowerPoint slideshow that ex- plains how to use the tools. 

Reisner, the developer of the package, is a former national trainer for NICAR. 

Would you be willing to share a mapping ex- ample with fellow jour- nalists? Send an elec- tronic copy of the map along with details to David Herzog at dherzog@nicar.org 

ChoicePoint


Know The Power "AutoTrackXP 

Using unique search logic, AutoTrackXP provides Internet access to more than 14 billion current and historical records on individuals and businesses, and allows you to browse through them instantly. 

Give us a call and we'll show you how to put AutoTrackXP to work for you - 800.530.4539. 

www.autetrackxp.com 

know. now. 

o 2002 ChoicePoint Asset Company. All rights reserved. The ChoicePoint logo, know.now. and LinkIT are trademarks and ChoicePoint and AutoTrackXP are registered trademarks of ChoicePoint Asset Company 

July . August 2002


7


www.ire.org 

SPOTLIGHT: CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

# Data can help profile a candidate's street machine 

By David Gulliver, The Virginian-Pilot 

It goes like this: Millionaire decides to be politician, millionaire throws per- sonal fortune into race, millionaire runs TV ads day and night. 

Sometimes the millionaire still loses. Just ask Michael Huffington or Ross Perot - or Mark Warner. The cell phone mogul put $6 million of his money into a Senate run from Virginia in 1996. He lost. 

Last year, Warner tried again - this time for Virginia's governor. 

So by November, from Seinfeld at 7 to the news at 11 you'd see ads for Warner or his Republican opponent, Mark Earley. 

And when Warner won in a state that hasn't gone Democratic since Doug Wilder in 1989, it was easy to figure he did it with just the ad blitz. 

But we had a way to test it. 

## Data resource 

In Virginia, newspapers have a great resource, the Virginia Public Access Project (VPAP). 

It began when Virginia newspapers teamed up to build a campaign contri- butions database for the 1997 elec- tions. David Poole, a former reporter, runs the group. 

Now, VPAP takes in candidates elec- tronic data, codes it, makes it available on the Web site www.vpap.org and (for subscribers) via downloads. 

The database grows every year, in size and in detail. For example, the name and address of every person or busi- ness getting campaign money is listed. Date and reason for payment also are listed. 

Poole pointed out those features in midsummer, as I was importing a first round of data. We checked it then and 

saw Warner paying a lot of people in two cities near our region. 

I planned to look at our cities when the post- election reports arrived, in mid-December. 

## Cleaning and querying 

A look at what kind of organizations the candidates put into the field means getting a count of "street-level" employ- ees. On paper, that's pretty simple - but we do this stuff on computers. 

(For the record, I used SQL commands in Visual FoxPro 6,0 for most work, and exported tables to Excel to build charts.) 

A field called "service," or the reason for payment, helped zero in on money for staffers. The campaigns did not re- spond to questions, so I had to de- velop criteria. 

Earley, the Republican, coded most payments to field people as "Literature Drop/Flush" - as in "flushing the vote," like a hunter flushes game from the brush. 

But about 100 entries were coded "Sal- ary" or "Payroll." Some of the same people were coded under flush. Oth- ers were people who were first paid close to Election Day. 

Virginia governor race contributions 

Those I counted as field employees. I excluded a handful of records - pay- ments to a handful of top aides and to companies that managed his payroll. Warner's payroll was more compli- cated. He had two separate commit- tees working to elect him, and had many employees multicoded "Elec- tion Day Staff" and "Salary," for example. 



I built his employee roster using the same criteria as I did for Earley. From there, it was simple to run queries to look at how each campaign built its operations. 

Running a count of employees, overall and by city, let me compare the cam- paigns' staffing, statewide and by region. 

Having the date of payment and date of report was important. I ran queries 

8


July August 2002


Uplink 

that gave me how many employees received their first payment by each report date. 

That allowed comparing how many people worked for each candidate at specific mileposts during the campaign. 

Finally, addresses with several employ- ees with different last names might help find some possible mischief - for ex- ample, dummy addresses or busi- nesses funneling money. 

## Results showed surprises 

The data let us debunk some myths about millionaires like Warner. 

Warner didn't just win with ads. He built a massive street-level machine and outmanned his opponent in every way - city by city, and at every stage in the campaign. 

By election day, he had almost 2,600 paid staff across the state - five times as many as the Republican. Warner spent $1.4 million on staff, more than double Earley's total. 

Two months before the election, Warner had six times as many paid staff getting out his message. And in our region, Hampton Roads - also Earley's home turf - Warner still had twice as many paid staff. 

That was to be expected. In October, a map showed more than 1,000 con- tributions from five cities to the two candidates. Warner received heavy support from traditional Republican turf like the Virginia Beach oceanfront - and even in Earley's home city, Chesapeake (bottom center of map; dots represent those who contributed to Warner, and triangles show Earley contributors). 

Earley's aides said they had more un- paid volunteers than Warner - some- thing impossible to test with the data but admitted that Warner's paid army overwhelmed them. 

One weakness was that previous data was not as detailed, so there was no 

way to compare "street-level" efforts in past campaigns. But professors, party bosses and ward leaders told us that there'd never been an effort like Warner's, and that Democrats seemed to have stolen the Republican playbook. 

The last round of queries - looking for multiple-person addresses - paid off in an unexpected way. 

The suspicious addresses turned out to be families with grandparents, par- ents, stepbrothers and sisters all un- der one roof. 

And so it included a human angle - and some insider stuff too. The homeowner was a part-time teacher, who got a call from the teacher's union looking for volunteers. And so she, her parents and kids got paid to put brochures un- der windshield wipers after church for a few Sunday mornings. 

## Lessons from the data 

This data was unusually clean. The story took two-plus days for data work, and two-plus days of reporting, writing and editing. If your own data needs considerable cleaning, leave more time for cleanup and verification. 

If you don't have such detailed data, use the campaign's overall salary spending and office space expenses to measure its get-out-the-vote effort.- 

David Gulliver can be reached by e-mail at dgulliver@pilotonline.com 

readme.tx 

## Resources 

Tipsheet #1499 from the IRE Resource Center describes the Virginia Public Access Project's campaign finance data work. Members can obtain tipsheets at www.ire.org/resourcecenter/ Members and nonmembers can also obtain copies by calling 573-882-3364. 

NEWS
AND THE


## Business and data 

The WorldCom debacle is still unfolding after the company admitted that it had improperly accounted for almost $4 billion in expenses. Journalists can dig up information about that com- pany and thousands of others in a database of federal contracts. A substantial part of WorldCom's income is from federal dollars. 

IRE and NICAR offers the Fed- eral Procurement Data System of federal contracts. IRE and NICAR can provide data for fis- cal years 1992-2001. 

## Disasters in data 

In the coverage of disastrous wildfires in Western states, data can provide some per- spective. From the Data Library's Storm Events data- base: On May 4, 2000, for ex- ample, a fire in New Mexico began that eventually caused $1.5 billion worth of damage. 

Despite its name, the Storm Events database includes much more than tornadoes, hurricanes and snowstorms. Obtained from the National Climatic Data Cen- ter, it's the official U.S. govern- ment database of many natural disasters around the country. The database covers 1950-2001 and includes such items as the type of disasters, states and counties, the dates when the disasters OC- curred, dollar amounts of dam- ages, fatalities and injuries, and in many cases, a memo field with additional information. 

July August 2002


9


FRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

# SPOTLIGHT: CAMPAIGN FINANCE Looking at the spending side of the ledger 

By Hank Shaw, The (Fredricksburg, Va.) Free Lance-Star 

Most campaign finance stories focus on who's giving money to candidates; after all, controversial political action commit- tees such as the National Rifle Associa- tion or Planned Parenthood draw head- lines, as do celebrity contributors and big state or federal contractors. 

Know candidates by the friends they keep, the saying goes. Well, an even better way to "know" a candidate is by looking at the spending side of the ledger. 

In Virginia, there are few competitive congressional races this year-or any other, for that matter. Carefully drawn districts see to that. 

Nevertheless, a look at every area representative's reports as a matter of course can pay off. Consider the case of 7th District Rep. Eric Cantor, a first- 

MOVING?


Please send us your new address so you don't miss one issue of Uplink. 

Drop us a note at jgreen@ire.org 



Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc. 

termer sitting in one of the most Re- publican districts in America. 

Cantor had no opponent for the first 15 months of the 2002 election cycle, until former Georgia Rep. Ben "Cooter" Jones said he'd challenge Cantor in early March. Jones played Cooter on "The Dukes of Hazzard" during the 1970s. He later served two terms in Congress. 

## Surprise in the data 

But Jones' challenge would not have been reflected on Cantor's April 15 FEC report, which only covered until March just two weeks before Jones announced. 

So I expected a sleepy report. Not so. Cantor had already spent an astonish- ing $674,000, between his federal cam- paign account and a state leadership PAC. That rivaled NRCC Chairman and 11th District Rep. Tom Davis' war chest and blew away everyone else in the com- monwealth or even the region. 

Why would someone spend so much so early in an election year no one ex- pected to be much of a challenge? had an idea, and some number- crunching proved it right. 

First thing was to download all of Cantor's Federal Election Commission reports from www.fec.gov. 

Following the directions, I dumped Cantor's reports into an Excel spread- sheet, added them in order and stripped the contributor information off before formatting any data, leaving only the spending side. 

## Looking at the expenses 

list contained only 128 entries. 

It proved to be a fairly large-but man- ageable-data set, with 465 entries. By way of comparison, Cantor's neighbor- ing first-termer, 1st District Rep. Jo Anne Davis, lived far more frugally. Her 

Just eyeballing the data, it was clear that Cantor's chief political consultant, Ray Allen Jr., had both feet in the trough. His name, and those of his vari- ous employees and companies, made the list numerous times. 

A simple pivot table separated Allen items from the rest. Dropping the ven- dor name in the row section and the amount in the data section, the table showed how much money each of Allen's entities received, nine in all. 

It turned out he'd received more than $300,000 in consulting fees, direct mail expenses and payroll from the Cantor campaign. That's more money than all but one other campaign in Virginia had even raised, let alone spent on one consultant. 

Some of the examples for the article: $47,000 worth of catering expenses, $25,525 for two polls-one of which was conducted in March 2001 - and $5,162 on plane tickets for fund-raising trips. 

Cantor also spent $282 for a night at the Minneapolis Hyatt and $380 for two nights at Boston's Logan Hilton. 

## Data can cement stories 

None of this required any serious knowledge of Excel; database man- ager Access wasn't needed for any serious queries. Expect this to change, however, once Cantor begins fund- raising for his race against Jones. 

Cantor was always known as a silver- spoon candidate, and his consultant Allen is famous statewide as a spender of other people's money. This story ce- mented those reputations with hard data, where before all the evidence was merely anecdotal. 

Cantor and Allen said they expect to raise at least $1.5 million to defeat Jones this fall. Bet on every penny get- ting spent, too. 

Hank Shaw, who just left The Free-Lance Star, can be contacted by e-mail at scrbblr@hotmail.com 

10


July August 2002


Uplink 



SPOTLIGHT: CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

# Boot Camp boosts campaign reporting 

By Jim Miller, The Modesto Bee 

Until I attended a NICAR Boot Camp in summer 2000, I knew almost noth- ing about how computers could help on stories. While still learning, I've be- come comfortable using CAR cover- ing campaign finance. 

A pretty straightforward story a few days before the March 5 primary fo- cused on the location of candidate donors. Was the source of money within the district they were running for, or from donors elsewhere? 

With some campaign contribution data already in Access because of earlier stories, I updated the information from the Federal Election Commission and California Secretary of State Web sites and added a field called "in-district." For each record, I entered "yes" or "no" based on the donor's address. It went pretty fast, despite the number of records. 

## Tracking money sources 

California, like other states, redrew its political boundaries last year. Some contributions came from cities - such as Modesto - that had been divided like postwar Berlin. ArcView could have plotted donor addresses, but I decided to classify split-city contributions as in-district. 

Access queries counted the numbers of in-district "yes" and "no." The results showed the breakdown of in-district and out-of-district contributions. Then I started calling candidates and experts. 

A state Senate candidate who received more than 90 percent of his money from outside the district explained it this way: He got into the race late and so needed to focus on big-dollar donors in Los Angeles and Sacramento. And, he said, statewide organizations such as unions and business associations that gave to him have local members. 

His outspent primary opponent, who raised most of his money in the dis- trict, predictably said the findings proved that he was more in touch with local issues. 

Experts provided important perspec- tive for the story. One noted that out- of-district money lets a candidate take positions different from those of local moneyed interests, i.e. farmworker rights in an agricultural area. 

As it was, the candidate with heavy out- of-district support won the primary. 

## Sharing political foes 

After the primary, there's another cam- paign finance story: Looking at how many donors had given to two oppos- ing candidates for Congress during the candidates' time in the state Legislature. 

Dennis Cardoza, a Democrat assem- blyman, and Dick Monteith, a Republi- can state senator, became part of the biggest political story of the year when they ran for the Modesto-area congres- sional seat now held by Gary Condit. Both won their respective primaries. 

Until then, Monteith and Cardoza were considered political allies, with similar positions despite belonging to different parties. There also was an apparent understanding of "don't help my oppo- nents and I won't help yours" between the two. 

But as they say in politics, if you want a friend, get a dog. Primary victories in hand, Monteith and Cardoza began to bad-mouth the other's legislative records. 

Campaign contributions- - from a com- piled database of their campaign con- tributions from 1997 through 2001 - gave a good perspective on their his- tories in the Legislature. 

# 2002 IRE Regional Conference 



OCTOBER 19-20 

The Coastal Georgia Center 305 Fahm St. Savannah, GA 31401 

Panels that touch on every beat: 

Hot issues in the South, election coverage, freedom of information and open records, backgrounding individuals, investigating City Hall, courts, cops and education 

## CAR classes: 

Internet, spreadsheets, databases, mapping, statistical software 

For hotel reservations call: 

Radisson Hotel Historic Savannah 912-790-7000 (ask for the IRE room block) 

Sponsors: 

Morris Communications Corp. Savannah Morning News 



Register online at www.ire.org/training/savannah02 or call 573-882-2042 

continued on page 12


July August 2002


11


www.nicar.org 

# boot camp continued from page 11 

## Labor-intensive data 

Fortunately for my wrists, my em- ployer paid a firm about $250 to en- ter approximately 1,500 records from 1997 and 1998. I entered 1999 data and downloaded 2000 and 2001 re- ports off the Internet into Excel. Que- ries from the database pulled infor- mation on matching donors. 

There were considerable headaches, however. Over the years, campaign committee treasurers had listed con- tributors a variety of ways, such as 

Gallo Winery, EJ Gallo, E&J Gallo Win- ery, etc. One query found a donor match for Gallo Winery, for example, and more searches for "*gallo** found other company contributions. Such wildcard searches helped on this story. 

Also, after seeing a message on the NICAR-L listserv, a careful check of the data-entry firm's work found some errors. 

Gradually, though, a list of dual do- nors emerged. There were dozens of them, totaling hundreds of thousands of dollars in contributions. During in- terviews, many of the donors said they liked both lawmakers and agreed with their voting records. 

Cardoza and Monteith, of course, dis- agreed that a shared past of campaign donors implied similar political views. And campaign finance experts noted that businesses and interest groups often give to candidates of all stripes to get access. 

Still, CAR gave some perspective on both candidates' newfound criticism of the other. More CAR campaign finance stories are planned as the November general election approaches. 

Jim Miller can be contacted by e-mail at jmiller@modbee.com 



DEADLINE: Postmark
AWARDS
2002
by Jan. 13, 2003
The annual contest of Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.
Categories
The contest
Television	Newspaper	Online	recognizes the
For outstanding investigative	For outstanding investigative	For outstanding investigative
reporting by a television	reporting at a daily or weekly	reporting that 1) appears	best investigative
outlet. Categories are:
newspaper (Use highest
exclusively on the Web or 2)
Network or syndicated	appears first and exclusively
program, Top 20 market	one-day circulation of the	on the Web, even though it	reporting in print,
and Below Top 20 market	week.) Categories are:	may later be published in a
Circulation less than 100,000;
Other Media
newspaper or magazine or	broadcast and
Circulation between 100,000	broadcast on television.
For outstanding investigative	and 250,000; Circulation	NOTE If work is published first
reporting in other media	more than 250,000, and	or broadcast in traditional media,	on the Web and later published	online media, and
including Book, Magazine,
Local-Circulation Weekly	there cannot be two entries. An
Specialty Publication, Radio	entrant must choose which
and Newsletter.	category to enter.	helps identify
Special Categories	techniques and
Tom Renner Award: Outstanding	IRE FOI Award: Hohors individual or	Student Award: Outstanding	resources used by
reporting in any medium covering	organization in any medium whose	investigative reporting by a student in
and exposing organized crime.	significant actions further open	a college-affiliated newspaper,	entrants.
You must submit TWO sets of	records or open government You	magazine or specialty publication, or
copies if submitting an entry in the	must submit TWO sets of copies if	broadcast work that has been
Tom Renner category and in	submitting an entry in the FO	públicly reviewed, screened or aired.
another category	category and in another category



NOTE Judges reserve the right to give more than one award in a category or to declare no winner in a category 

For entry forms and additional information, visit our Web site at www.ire.org/contest 

12


July August 2002


Uplink


SPOTLIGHT: CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

# Working with FEC electronic filing data 

By Aron Pilhofer, IRE's Campaign Finance Information Center 

From import to analysis, working with raw federal campaign finance data used to be a frustrating chore for even the most skilled CAR reporter. 

But not anymore. 

The Federal Election Commission's new electronic filing Web site makes viewing, importing and analyzing data fast enough for deadline reporting, and easy enough for anyone with basic CAR skills and a spreadsheet. 

The FEC has been experimenting with electronic filing for years. But the 2002 election cycle is the first in which it is mandatory for political parties, PACs as well as candidates for president and U.S. House. For journalists, this is a boon. 

For deadline, electronic filing data is simply better than the raw data used in previous cycles. It is more complete because it includes both contributions and expenditures-something - journal- ists never had easy access to before. 

It also includes full street addresses, rather than just city, state and ZIP Code. That makes the task of positively identifying contributors, their relatives and spouses much easier. 

## Viewing data 

The FEC electronic filing site is located here: http://herndon2.sdrdc.com dcdev/. From the main search page, you can find filings any number of ways: by committee, name, state, party, report type, the filing date or com- mittee ID. 

Once you've located the committee you are interested in, you'll see all the filings for the current cycle listed un- der the committee name in order of the date they were filed with the FEC. Here's a typical example: 

FEC-18381 Form F3N - period 01/01/ 2001-06/30/2001, filed 07/31/2001 - MID-YEAR 

The first code (FEC-18381) you can ignore. It's an internal code used by the FEC as a unique identifier. The rest tells you what form is being filed, whether it is a new or amended filing (amended filings will have an "A", new filings will have an "N"), what reporting dates it covers, when it was filed and the name of the reporting period. 

It's important to note that just because a filing appears at the top of the list does not mean it is the most recent fil- ing. Frequently, committees will amend or correct older reports, and those will appear on the list in order of the date they were filed with the FEC, not the filing periods they cover. The older re- ports won't be removed but will have a small "amended by" notation added along with a link to the updated report. 

The bottom line: Make sure you're look- ing at the most up-to-date version of the report. 

Once you've got the filing you want, you can view it by clicking on the "view" link just to the left of the label. This will produce an electronic version of the old paper records organized in exactly the same way with the summary pages first followed by the detailed schedules. 

## Download and import 

To get a file onto your local computer for spreadsheet work, simply click on the "Download" link next to the one you want. The file will be saved with a ".fec" extension, but it is nothing more than a simple comma-delimited text file. 

You'll also want to save yourself some typing and download a list of column headers from the FEC site. They are 

found in a self-extracting file, which you can download by clicking on the link at the top of the page titled "Format docu- mentation for downloads." The head- ers file is an Excel document titled "e- filing headers.xls and includes all the column heads for each of the FEC forms. Once you have your filing im- ported, you can simply copy and paste in the appropriate column head. 

To begin importing, launch Excel, click File-> Open, navigate to the folder in which you saved your filings and open the filing. Unless you renamed it when you downloaded, it will be named something like "21232.fec". 

Click on your file, and click the "Open" button and the text import wizard will open. In order for the data to be imported correctly make sure of the following: 

Use the "start import at row" selector to begin at row 3. The first two lines are not important for us. They are a header row that indicates what soft- ware the committee used, and the sec- ond line is the aggregate data. (Not all versions of Excel have the "start im- port" feature. If yours doesn't, you'll have to delete the first two rows by hand later on.) 
If you are importing expenditures (which have a different layout than con- tributions, but are in the same file) you'll want to open the filing in a text editor before importing into Excel and deter- mine what line the disbursement data begins on, and use the "start import at row" selector to exclude contributions. 
By default, all the columns are for- matted as the "General" datatype, which means Excel will guess what sort of format you want based on what type of data it thinks the column contains. This will cause problems for ZIP codes, which often have leading zeros. To avoid losing data, make sure the ZIP field is formatted as text. 
The date fields are unformatted and are listed as year, month then day (e.g., 20011231). To convert them to dates on import, change the column to the date 

continued on page 14 

July August 2002


13


THE Database Library 573.884.7711 

FEC


continued from page 13 

format and select the YMD option in the pulldown menu. Now, your dates will be formatted correctly. 

## Final touches 

There are a few more steps you might want to take before you start crunch- ing and munching the data. 

Scroll down the spreadsheet until you see the "SA" codes in Column A change to "SB" (SA means schedule A, or, con- tributions, and SB means schedule B, or, disbursements). You don't want to have both in the same sheet, and if you scroll over you'll see some of the data was corrupted during the import because disbursements have a different layout than contributions even though they are in the same file. I find it easiest to simply note the row on which the disbursements begin, delete them out of the sheet and then re-import starting at the row on which the expenditure data begins. 
Wouldn't it be nice to know what all these columns mean? Open the Ex- cel headers file you downloaded ear- lier and find the row that matches the code in the first column of your data (e.g., SA, SB, etc). Find the appropri- 

ate column headers, then copy and paste into your spreadsheet. 

You may have already noticed that the name field is a single column, with individuals' first and last names delim- ited by the caret (^) character. There is a quick fix for this: Click on the Con- tributor Name column to select the en- tire thing, and select Insert-> Columns four times. You should have four blank columns to the right of your Contribu- tor Name column. Now comes a nifty trick: Assuming your Contributor Name column is still selected, select Data-> Text to Columns and a wizard similar to the text import wizard will appear. In step 2, click the "other" delimiter option, and in the window type a single caret (shift-6). Not all campaigns will use four fields for names, but some do. It's better to add too many blank fields at the be- ginning because if you are not careful with the text to columns feature, it will over write data in your spreadsheet. Don't for- get to type in the appropriate column headers, e.g. first name, last name, pre- fix, suffix. 

## Ready for stories 

The electronic filing data gives you the ability to analyze in ways that would have been impractical using paper records: Calculate the number of out-of-state con- tributors. Look for evidence of bundling, 

kiddie contributors, spouses and other related individuals. There are any num- ber of ways to look at the data. 

At this point you could also import your spreadsheet into a database manager like Microsoft Access or FoxPro to com- pare it with previous filings or those of another candidate. 

With electronic filing reporters can do more than write the standard deadline horse race story-who's raised the most, and has the most on hand. Now, you can bring some context and depth to your reporting, and do it on deadline. 

Aron Pilhofer can be reached by e-mail at aron@ire.org 

readme.tx 

## Resources 

The FEC posts filings almost instantly on the electronic site, even before they have been reviewed by staff. Reports are frequently amended, so be aware that the data you download may be changed later on. Before you run with a story, it is a good idea to make sure the reports are the most up-to-date. 
The U.S. Senate exempted itself from the electronic filing requirement, so you will not find any Senate filings at the FEC electronic filing site. Those data are available only in the raw files available from the FEC's FTP site. 

## Beware: Data caveats and tips 

For more information about campaign finance, including data, training, tipsheets to help journalists and more, go to www.campaignfinance.org. For a more detailed tutorial about electronic filings, especially for beginners, go to the IRE Resource Center Web site at www.ire.org/ resourcecenter or call 573-882-3364 

The "official" data is still maintained on the agency's FTP site (and from the IRE and NICAR Data Library, already processed into DBF format). If you are not working on a story that requires the absolutely most recent filings, those are the files you should use. 
Just because the data is filed electronically does not mean it is clean. Expect to find mistakes. But committees are using software that standardizes names and addresses somewhat, creating fewer data- entry errors. 
Before you dive in to the number crunching, print out a copy of the 
summary pages from the filing just to make sure your aggregate numbers are correct. If things don't add up, it's probably because the campaign has memo entries in the data with additional information about certain types of contributions. Filter those out using the Memo Code or Memo Text columns. 
It's also best to use the codes in column A to break out the different types of contributions, and ignore the "Entity Type" column, which frequently is incorrect. The code tells you everything you need to know anyway - the schedule and line number on which the contribution will be aggregated. 

14


July
August 2002


Uplink


# Tech tip 

SPOTLIGHT: CAMPAIGN FINANCE Setting up an automated FTP download By Griff Palmer, San Jose Mercury News 

When looking for an FTP client, power users often cast aside the lowly com- mand line client bundled with Microsoft's Windows 32-bit operating systems in favor of jazzier GUI clients. 

Beneath the Win32 client's drab ex- terior, though, is a program with scripting capabilities to rival pro- grams from the Unix side of the tracks. Database software FoxPro, with its own scripting abilities and its ability to call other programs, makes a perfect complement for this decep- tively plain-clothed client. 

Any command that can be invoked from the FTP command line can be written into a text file. Whole strings of commands can be stored in a script and executed en masse. 

Running a FoxPro script in concert with an FTP script, and throwing in some PKZip as needed, it's possible to au- tomate complex data retrieval and im- portation tasks. 

Key to this process is the fact that FTP can capture not only data files but also the contents of directory listings. A text capture of a directory listing, is a nice, structured file that can be parsed into a FoxPro file, edited and output to a text file that can, in turn be invoked as an FTP script. 

Think about it for a second: You can capture a directory listing from a re- mote FTP site and use the file names from that directory listing to form the backbone of an FTP script. It can save a lot of typing. 

## Preparing for the script 

Putting together such a script can be time-consuming. The effort may not be 

worth it for one-time jobs. But for FTP jobs you run regularly, these scripts can be real time-savers. 

Let's go through a FoxPro/FTP/ PKZip trifecta that goes to the FEC site, captures data files and unzips them. (From there it should be obvi- ous how to add commands to the script to append the unzipped files into pre-structured tables.) 

There are a couple of prerequisites: (1) a tweak to your FoxPro settings; (2) a shell file into which to append the directory listing once you've captured it. 

To adjust our FoxPro settings, we've got to stop thinking scripts for a minute and delve into the Windows GUI. 

Using your favorite method, browse to the FoxPro directory (FPW26) in a standard FoxPro 2.6 installation. Look for a file icon labeled "FOXRUN." Right-click on the icon and choose Properties. Click on the Program tab in the Properties dialog. Near the bottom of the dialog is a checkbox labeled "Close on exit." Make sure the checkbox is checked. This setting assures that control is returned to FoxPro after an external program has done its stuff. (The same process can work with later versions of FoxPro as well.) 

## Making directory listing 

The shell file should contain one field wide enough to accommodate the widest path/filename listing in a di- rectory display. For what we're do- ing here, 50 bytes will be wide enough. Create a table called dirlist. with a single field called filenames. 

FOXPUN Properties

Memory
Screen
Misc
 General
Security
Summary
Program
For

FoxPro Run Command

Cmd line
COMMAND

Working

Batch file

Shortcut Resc
None
8

Run
Normal window

Date on and

Advanced
Change Icon

OK
Cancel
Apply


We're going to break this into two scripts. The first script will go to the site and capture the directory listing. It consists of a text file called ftpscrpt.txt containing these com- mands: 

cd /FEC/electronic Is /FEC/electronic text.txt close bye 

The first line changes to the appro- priate directory on the FTP site. The second line calls a directory listing of /FEC/electronic and redirects the output to a file called text.txt. Then the script ends the FTP session. 

But how do we start the FTP ses- sion and invoke the script? The fol- lowing command would do it from a DOS prompt: 

ftp -s:ftpscrpt.tx -A ftp.fec.gov 

FTP launches the client. The -S: switch, followed by a filename, causes the client to treat the contents of that file as a script. The -A switch 

continued on page 16 

July August 2002


15


vigit our www.nicar.org 

# Tech tip continued from page 15 

forces the client to log you on as an anonymous user. (If you find your- self using a server that doesn't al- low anonymous log-ins, just drop the -A switch and add a user name and password to your ftp script file.) 

The command string and switches are followed by the address of the ftp site. 

Last steps for program 

This same string of commands and switches can be called from inside a FoxPro script. Create a program file. (I named mine, fit- tingly enough, ftp. prg.) 

By simply adding the word "run" to the line above, the FoxPr script will launch the FTP session and carry out the commands in the ftp script file: 

run ftp ssffpscrpt.txt -A ftp.fec.gov 

Once the ftp script is finished, control will be handed back to FoxPro, and you'll have a text file called text.txt. containing the directory listing from the FEC site. 

Now you can use your FoxPro script to work a little mojo on that text file. Everything below-including explana- tory notes that begin with the "&&" character string - is in our Fox pro- gram file, ftp prg: 

run ftp -s:ftpscrpt.txt -A ftp.fec.gov & & The ftp script we've already invoked 

use dirlist & & Opens the shell file we created earlier 

append from text.txt type sdf & & Appends the directory list into the .dbf file 

replace all filenames with "get "+filenames & & Adds an ftp "get" command before each file listing. 

go top & & Goes to the top 

insert blank before & & Inserts a blank row 

replace filenames with "binary" &5 Adds an FTP "binary" command, critical for downloading binary files such as .zips or jpegs 

replace filenames with "cd /FEC/ electronic" & Adds an FTP change-directory command 

go bottom & & Goes to the bottom of the file 

append blank 

replace filenames with "quit" & & Adds an FTP "quit" command 

& & Suppose we didn't want all the files in the directory listings, but only those produced after certain dates. This is easy with the FEC data because the file naming conventions are date-based. You can use the file names to eliminate from the script those files you're not interested in getting. Suppose we don't want any files dated before March 25, 2000: 

delete for filenames='get and substr (filenames, 21,81 < "20020325" pack copy to ftpscrpl. fields filenames type delimited with blank & & Now we copy our work out of the .dbf file to a txt file "delimited with blank" is necessary to eliminate leading spaces from the text file. 

& & Et, voila! We've now created a second FTP script that will go back to the FTP site and retrieve the files we've specified. 

close all 

run ftp -s:ftpscrpl.tx -A ftp.fec.gov & & We run the newly created script file, ftpscrpl. 

run \pkzip\pkunzip ..zip 56 Then we unzip the files we've just created. 

Avoiding other problems 

equally well into this scheme. 

There is one issue here. The old PKZip V. 2.04g doesn't support long file names. When you run into long file names that can create problems. WinZip offers a command line inter- face, which theoretically should work as well from a FoxPro script and should overcome the long file name problem. Doubtless there are other command line-based compression programs out there that can be worked 

If you regularly run a FoxPro/FTP script combination, you might forget to erase text files and to clean out your shell file. A pre-existing file can make your script stop and prompt you for an overwrite - no big deal unless you're counting on that script running itself while you take a lunch break. Append- ing file names to a shell file that's al- ready got data in it has the potential for creating nasty confusion. 

You can simply add record-delete and file-delete commands to your FoxPro script to clean up detritus that may get in the way later. 

In this example script, we used the "Is" command to capture the directory from the server. This gave us a short-form directory. However, there may be times when you want a long-form directory. For instance, if you want dates to key on for deciding which files to down- load and the site's file naming conven- tions aren't date-based, the date- time stamps in the long-form direc- tory can be valuable. 

Substituting "dir" for "Is" will give you a long directory. 

Happy FTPing! 

Griff Palmer can be reached by e-mail at GPalmer@sjmercury.com 



readme.txt 

Resources 

To download a copy of the program ftp.prg, go to www.nicar.org/techtips.html The Web page also features downloads and other supplementary materials for various articles that have appeared in past Uplinks. 

16


July August 2002


Uplink 

power continued from page 1 

will affect all levels - county, state and local. For example, many observers predict that state and local committees will be the new conduits for the hun- dreds of millions in soft money the na- tional parties will be prohibited from raising under the new law. 

But first things first. Election 2002 is an especially crucial midterm election, with a closely divided electorate and a Congress reflecting that divide. Both parties believe they can win a majority in the House and Senate, and the na- tional party committees are raising record amounts of hard and soft money. 

In short, there will not be a dearth of storylines heading into the fall cam- paign season. And with that in mind, this issue of Uplink is intended to help add depth to your reporting on cam- paign finance. 

David Gulliver of The Virginian-Pilot covers the trend of independently wealthy candidates. 
David Herzog of IRE/NICAR shows how some journalists have used GIS software in their reporting to show vi- sually, for example, the pockets of power. 
Hank Shaw, formerly of The (Fredericksburg, Va.) Free Lance-Star writes about ways campaign finance data can be used to understand more about the interests backing a particu- lar candidate, including the little used expenditure data. 
Griff Palmer of the San Jose Mer- cury News demonstrates how to use FoxPro's scripting capabilities to auto- mate some of the more laborious tasks, such as downloading and importing campaign finance data. 
And I discuss the wealth of data to be found at the Federal Election Commission's new electronic filing Web site, and how easy it is to download, import and analyze it. 

This is just a fraction of what's avail- able through IRE, the Campaign Fi- nance Information Center and other or- ganizations. 

For data, tipsheets and other informa- tion, visit the CFIC Web site at www.campaignfinance.org. Our Re- source Center includes tipsheets writ- ten by some of the best in the business. 

Tracker, our quarterly newsletter, is chock full of practical information and advice from reporters who know the issue inside and out. And of course, the NICAR Database Library has up-to- date data for every election cycle since 1991-92 in an easy-to-import format. 

The FEC (www.fec.gov) has posted a number of easy-to-understand docu- ments and reports on its Web site that will help reporters understand the com- plexities of the system. Links to your state elections offices can be found on the CFIC site (www.campaignfinance.org/ states/index.html). 

For data on the Web, Center for Respon- sive Politics (www. opensecrets.org) has one of the best searchable databases of federal data. The National Institute on Money in State Politics (www.followthemoney.org) offers the same sorts of lookups, but for state can- didates and committees. 

To learn more about how the law will change when the reform law takes ef- fect, visit the Campaign Finance Insititute (www.cfinst.org), which has done an outstanding synopsis and analysis of the new law. Common Cause (www.commoncause.org) and Public Citizen (www.publiccitizen.org) also have written extensively on the subject. 

Lastly, there is one trend that report- ers at all levels should be aware of: the rise of political nonprofits, sometimes called Section 527 organizations. The groups, along with state and local party committees, are expected to be the loophole allowing soft money back into the federal system. They also are be- coming more common in local and state elections. For an extensive his- 

tory, download the Common Cause report "Under the Radar," available on its Web site. Public Citizen also has done three studies examining the prob- lems of disclosure and policing of 527s, which ranges from poor to nonexistent. Those reports also are available on Public Citizen Web site. 

The campaign finance issue will be big news for some time to come, and COV- ering elections and the issues sur- rounding them is only going to get more complex as the parties and candidates must get more creative in finding ways to fund their elections. The resources above are a good start. 

Aron Pilhofer can be reached by e-mail at aron@ire.org. 

# readme.tx 

Training 

IRE and NICAR Census seminars are being planned for journalists across the United States. For the latest information, go to www.ire.org/training/otr.html. 

## Tipsheets 

The tipsheets from the annual IRE conference in San Francisco are now available on the IRE Web site in the Resource Center section. You can search them at www.ire.org/resourcecenter.To find the tipsheets from this particular conference, search for San Francisco IRE Annual 2002. 

Tipsheets are available on topics ranging from backgrounding public and private businesses to hospital and medical data sources to ten tips for writing tightly. If you have any questions about tipsheets, please contact the Resource Center at 573-882- 3364 or rescntr@ire.org. 

July August 2002


17


www.ire.org 

# drug use continued from page 1 

Michigan, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, Utah, Washington and West Virginia. 

Each state's program is slightly differ- ent from the others, but the overall in- tent is the same: to collect information about the prescription of controlled substances. Ritalin, Adderall and other ADHD drugs are Schedule II narcot- ics, so details about their use is col- lected under these programs. For de- tails on the programs, see the DEA's Web site at www.deadiversion.usdo .gov/pubs/program/rx_monitor/faqs.htn 

In Illinois, every time a pharmacist fills a prescription for Ritalin, the state gets a record of that transaction electroni- cally. The record includes the name and address of the person who re- ceived the drug, his or her birth date, and amount of the drug prescribed, which doctor wrote the script and where it was filled. 

The discovery that Illinois collected data on where people who get prescriptions filled live was a potential gold mine. 

## Data pinpoints drug use 

The Drug Enforcement Administration encourages states to do prescription monitoring because it's helpful in track- ing doctor shopping - instances where the same patient visits several physicians in hopes of collecting multiple prescrip- tions. It's also a good way to see if some doctors are prescribing unusually large amount of certain drugs. 

For reporters it's an excellent way of seeing exactly where some drugs are being used. 

Many stories have been done using DEA point-of-sale data, which shows how much Ritalin and other Schedule II narcotics are dispensed by pharma- cies. The best use of this data was in 2001 when The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer used it to measure Ritalin us- age for every county nationally. 

But that data has severe limitations when you want to measure usage by ZIP code, as we did in Chicago. In many areas, people don't get their pre- scription filled in the same ZIP code where they live. in Chicago, for ex- ample, point-of-sale data shows an unusually high Ritalin-usage rate in the downtown Loop area. But that's only because thousands of people come to work, get their children's prescriptions filled at pharmacies in the parents' of- fice buildings, and then they take it home to the suburbs in the evening. 

The discovery that Illinois collected data on where people who get pre- scriptions filled live was a potential gold mine. All we had to do was get our hands on the data. 

## Negotiations and threats 

Illinois' Department of Human Services initially told the Chicago Sun-Times it would cost $6,000 to provide informa- tion on where people were being pre- scribed Ritalin. When I called back to ask why the charge was so outra- geously high, I was told that some- one was going to have to write a pro- gram to extract that information from the prescription-monitoring database. (It was at this point that we realized Illinois even had a prescription-moni- toring program). 

Fine, we told them. Just send us the entire database and we'll extract what we need. That, the state told us, was impossible. 

We insisted they were mistaken, and after several more telephone calls, a few letters and promises of legal ac- 

Ritalin Distribotion in the Chicago Area 

McHenry Ca
Lake Co

Cook

DuFage

Kane

RITALIN
 DISTRIBUTION
 in The Chicago Area

Ca

12.1-14.5mg
 9.01-12mg
 6:01-9mg
 3:01-6mg
 0-3mg


tion, the state agreed with us - to a point. Based on our negotiations with them, the department agreed to give us portions of the data we were after. 

Names of patients and doctors weren't provided, nor were pharmacies. The state also refused to provide data for all counties in Illinois, arguing that in some counties one person had re- ceived a particular drug - and we could theoretically track down that patient, thus violating his right to privacy. 

In the end, we agreed to request data only from the ZIP codes in the six coun- ties in northeast Illinois - the region where the vast majority of the state lives and where the Sun-Times sells most of its newspapers. A few weeks later, a CD packed with data arrived in my mailbox. 

## False steps and analysis 

There were a few problems. The data didn't include dates of birth, only pa- tient ages (another concession we agreed to because of the state's fears that patients could be identified). It looked like there were a lot of babies receiving unusually large doses of some drugs. 

A call to the state explained the prob- 

18


July August 2002


Uplink 

lem. Anytime a record lacked a DOB, the programmers inserted a zero. That made analyzing the amount of drugs given infants impossible. 

At about this point the project was side- lined by Sept. 11 coverage. Ultimately, we asked the state to re-run the data, fix the age field (those missing DOBs were now labeled with 999) and update it with more numbers collected since our last request. Soon after, we had a CD with 641,735 records. Each line was 98 characters long. 

The data imported into Paradox (ver- sion 9.0) without a problem. The record layout the state provided made pars- ing the lines of data simple. But that didn't make it easy to read. 

The data had no drug names, only National Drug Code numbers. The number tells you exactly what the drug is and how strong a dose was pre- scribed. For example, 9042769 is a 10- milligram dose of methylphenidate hy- drochloride (the generic form of Ritalin) in tablet form. 

The state's data had 457 different NDC numbers. That doesn't mean there were 457 different drugs. In many cases, the same drug has multiple NDC numbers. For example, the NDC number 7811749 also indicates the pa- tient received 10-milligram meth- ylphenidate hydrochloride tablets. 

To make sense of it all, we downloaded the NDC dictionary from the DEA (PC and Mac versions are at www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/arcos/ ndc/ndc_dic.htm.) By joining this data to the state's, we had a database that showed at a glance what drugs were prescribed and at what dosage. 

Finally, we needed to know how many people lived in each ZIP code and how many fell into different age groups. We used Census ZIP Code Tabulation Area population. It's available from American Factfinder on the Census Bureau Web site www.census.gov. 

With this new, enhanced database - it 

now included the state's data, drug names and population figures - we did some relatively simple calcula- tions. Looking at Ritalin, for example, we added up all the milligrams of Ritalin prescribed to people under age 18 in each ZIP code, then divided by the number of people under age 18 living there. 

This ratio helped us learn where the largest proportions of certain popula- tions were receiving the drug. 

## Mapping the concentration 

Using ArcView 3.2, we opened ZIP code shape files for Illinois, and linked our state data to that on the "ZIP Code" fields. Then we mapped the ratio. 

Even someone with only a passing fa- miliarity with the Chicago area could see the patterns: ZIP codes in the north and far west suburbs - traditionally some of the area's wealthiest - were the same places were large concen- trations of the under age 18 popula- tion received these drugs. 

Most of the city, as well as the south suburbs, had relatively low usage rates. 

We ran a lot of those ratios - for spe- cific drugs and also for all forms of methylphenidate. We also used it to examine usage of ADHD drugs such as Adderall and Dexedrine. Generally, the results were consistent- wealthier areas have larger concentrations of the drugs being used. 

At this point a lot more traditional reporting began, with calls to doc- tors and parent groups, as well as visits to schools and meetings of support groups for parents with ADHD children. 

And while many of them had anec- dotal observations about where us- age was high or low, we had concrete numbers that helped focus the story on ADHD in a way that hadn't been done locally before. 

# readme.tx 

Mark Skertic can be reached by e-mail at mskertic@suntimes.com 

## Web address 

These stories are on the Sun-Times' Web site at www.suntimes.com/ special_sections/ritalin/ 

## Resources 

The IRE Resource Center provides stories and tipsheets to help journalists. Search the story and tipsheet databases at www.ire.org/resourcecenter for order numbers. Call 573-882- 3364 to order these and other investigative stories and tipsheets. 

## Story 

The (Cleveland) Plain-Dealer compiled 1996 Census projections and data from the Drug Enforcement Administration showing the breakdown of Ritalin sold in grams in the nation's 3,141 counties. The results show that the use of and prescribing of Ritalin varies from state to state but also by region. The analysis found high Ritalin use in the Northeast and upper Midwest, and even disparities in use within Ohio. Attitudes and theories on Ritalin use vary with some believing children in cold, isolated areas might be more prone to use the drug, some think military families are more inclined to use it, others believe children and families with attention disorders "migrate" to resort areas where the drug is more readily available. 

## Tipsheets 

Beth Marchak of The Plain Dealer offers guidelines for using Drug Enforcement Administration and other federal agency data to report on Ritalin consumption in this 2002 tipsheet. (Tipsheet #1572) 

July August 2002


19


Jetterson City, MO. Permit NO. 89 

Ira Chinoy Philip Merrill College of Journalism 1117 Journalism BLDG University of Maryland College Park MD 20742 

Uplink 

## Uplink Info 

A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Editor Brant Houston brant@ire.org 

Managing Editor Jeff Porter jeff@nicar.org 

NICAR is a joint program 

Asst. Managing Editor David Herzog dherzog@nicar.org 

of Investigative Reporters and 

Art Director Lisa Triefenbach lisa@ire.org 

Editors Inc. and the Missouri 

School of Journalism. 

NICAR services include 

supplying journalists with 

government databases, 

training programs, tipsheets and 

Director of Publications Len Bruzzese len@ire.org 

Advertising Coordinator Pia Christensen pia@ire.org 

Subscription Administrator John Green jgreen@ire.org 

Subscriptions IRE members $40, nonmembers $60 

Uplink Address: IRE-NICAR, 138 Neff Annex Missouri School of Journalism Columbia, MO 65211 