September
October 2003
 Volume: 15, Number 5

Published bimonthly by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
 www.nicar.org


CHILDREN 

## Tracking quality of life 

By Dave Davis The (Cleveland) Plain Dealer 

When Editor Doug Clifton called us into the conference room a year ago and said he wanted us to undertake an in-depth exami- nation of the state of children in Northeast Ohio, we politely rolled our eyes. 

It was clearly one of those dreaded editor-assigned projects, an important subject but one that had been more than a bit worn out in the press. It reminded me of the time a top editor here turned to me at a crowded projects brainstorming session and loudly blurted out, "Guns." She didn't add anything to the idea, but in her mind she was already laying out a five- part series that I was deter- mined not to work on. 

Clifton came to the table with more than simply the idea of "children" but not too much more. He wanted the stories to be data-driven, for us to take a report-card approach, compil- ing indicators that would 

continued on page 22 

SPOTLIGHT: POLLUTION Taking the pulse of a body of water By Lisa Stiffler, Seattle Post-Intelligencer 

Located on the shores of the Puget Sound, our newsroom has a front-row seat to our region's primary water body. We watch the ferries, kids playing on the beaches, fishermen tromping out to the piers. But when colleague Rob- ert McClure. and I were charged with evaluating the health of the sound, we had to figure out how to check its vital signs. 

We looked at different indicators: pol- lution - its sources past, present and future; populations of fish and other 



marine life; and contamination in sea- food. Lise Olsen, then the computer- 

continued on page 20 

SPOTLIGHT: FOR MORE ON POLLUTION SEE: 

Mapping contamination hot spots, p. 6 
Uncovering lead poisoning in Detroit, p. 8 
Finding pollution sources in Louisville, p. 10 
Following trends with air pollution data, p. 12 
The September/October 2003 IRE Journal 

GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS Database reporting shows no-bid deals By Phil Williams, WTVF-Nashville 

John Stamps was one heck of a tal- ented guy with all sorts of unique ex- periences that were needed by Ten- nessee taxpayers - that is if you be- lieved the bureaucrats who worked for Stamps' friend, former Tennessee Gov. Don Sundquist. 

The longer I sat at my computer, examining state contracts data, the more incredible the insurance agent's talents - especially for tapping into his political connections to land state 

contracts - appeared. Ultimately, we discovered Stamps' involvement in more than $200 million in state con- tracts handed out by the Sundquist administration. 

"In common parlance, it stinks!" said veteran state Rep. Frank Buck, as he reviewed the findings of our computer- assisted reporting project. 

Our "Friends in High Places" investi- gation led to a federal-state criminal 

continued on page 4


IRE Delebane 573.884.7711 

## Bits & Bytes 

## Fresh migration, aircraft data 



"San Diego County may have a stunning coastline, incompa- rable weather and a world-fa- mous zoo, but all that has not been enough to stem the flow of residents leaving the region for fast-growing areas in the West where housing is far cheaper." 

So began a recent story by the San Diego Union-Tribune that used Internal Revenue Ser- vice migration data, which is offered by the IRE and NICAR Database Library. The U.S. Census Bureau compiles the data, based on personal in- come tax return information, for the IRS. 

The database allows journal- ists to track the movement of people and their incomes, in and out of counties, from 1992 through 2002. USA Today used the migration data in an October 2002 report about how migration of affluent Cali- fornians has led to the domi- nance of Republican politicians in the mountain west states. 

Other recent updates include the U.S. Federal Aviation Ad- ministration Aircraft Registry, which lists all aircraft and air- craft owners registered in the United States (current through February 2003). Find out more at www.ire.org/datalibrary/data- bases or call 573-884-7711. 

## Breaking news help 

Power blackouts. Nightclub fires. Wars. Plane crashes. When disasters and other big news occur, journalists can find 

continued on page 4 

INSIDE NICAR 

# Contribute your files to database library 

By David Herzog, NICAR and Missouri School of Journalism 

Journalists hungry for high-quality data have turned to the IRE and NICAR Da- tabase Library for more than a decade. 

For those of you who are unfamiliar with it, the Database Library acquires data from government agencies and provides it in useful formats for jour- nalists and journalism organizations. The library staff, directed by Jeff Por- ter, processes the data and often fixes problems in the data so customers can focus on analyzing it for news stories. The staff also creates documentation that helps journalists understand the data better. 

The number of Database Library of- ferings has multiplied many times since the early days. Journalists can obtain data on a wide range of top- ics - transportation, public safety and business, to name a few - for low fees on a sliding scale. Smaller news organizations pay less than the big- ger outfits. 

When the Database Library started more than a decade ago, its initial of- ferings were databases that journal- ists had used for news stories and then donated. It was like a journalists' co-op for data. 

We want to revive that practice and ask you to donate your databases - the raw files you obtained from government agencies - to IRE and NICAR after your stories run. We are mainly inter- ested in national databases. Send us your data, along with any documenta- tion and notes about quirks that you discovered. We'll take a look at the data to see if it's something we would like to add to our collection. 

Jeff is leading this push to add more data. You can contact him at jeff@ire.org if you have data that you'd like to share. 

Contact David Herzog by e-mail at dherzog@nicar.org. 

## Hands-on CAR training upcoming 

IRE and NICAR have a number of training opportunities coming up for journalists who want to learn more about computer-assisted reporting. 

Journalists can get intensive hands-on training in using spread- sheets and database managers to produce high-impact news stories at the CAR Boot Camps, which will be held four times next year in Co- lumbia, Mo. The sessions are Jan. 4-9, March 21-26, May 16-21 and Aug. 1-6. 

An Advanced Boot Camp on Map- ping, scheduled for Jan. 9-11, will offer intensive hands-on training us- ing mapping software. An Advanced Statistics Workshop, taught by Steve Doig of Arizona State University and Sarah Cohen of The Washington Post, will be Feb. 13-15 for report- ers who want to move beyond basic CAR and use statistical analysis. 

For more information, see the IRE training calendar at www.ire.org/ training/otr.html. 

2


September October 2003


Uplink


FIRST VENTURE 

# State cars sit, waste tax money 

By Morgan Loew, KPHO-Phoenix 

Heading into the 2003 legislative ses- sion, the state of Arizona was facing a $1 billion budget shortfall. As in nearly every other state in the coun- try, revenues had fallen, programs were getting slashed and lawmakers were desperately looking for ways to cut expenses. 

Journalists were also under the gun to find wasteful spending and report it in print or on the air as fast as possible. We found it in an unusual place: state vehicles that were used so little, the state's own guidelines said they weren't worth the cost of owning them. 

Compared to hard-core computer-as- sisted reporting projects that can take months of spreadsheet and database analysis, this story was pretty simple to do using the skills I learned in a NICAR Boot Camp in January. 

## Looking for efficiency 

We found a recent audit of one state agency that referred to an "efficient use guideline" for state vehicles. It con- cluded state vehicles needed to be driven at least 10,000 miles per year to justify the cost of acquiring and main- taining the vehicles. 

With that minimum mileage standard in mind, we sent a public records re- quest to the Arizona Department of Administration asking for the entire state vehicle database. The depart- ment buys most state vehicles and leases them to individual agencies. 

We specifically asked for the following: license plate numbers; agency the ve- hicles are leased to; year, make and model of the vehicle; mileage at the beginning of the last fiscal year; and mile- age at the end of the last fiscal year. 

As is the case with most requests, the 

data I had asked for had shortcom- ings. Some vehicles were bought in the middle of the year and some were retired in mid-year. The result would not have given me a clear picture of how many miles were driven over a full year. Fortunately, the public infor- mation officer I was dealing with helped me and we came up with a better request. 

The department provided an Excel file at not cost 

## Querying the data 

The department provided an Excel file at no cost that had more than 2,000 rows and included a column that showed the average miles driven per month. It appeared the state had done most of the work for me. All I had to do was import the data into Microsoft Access and write a query that isolated vehicles driven fewer than 10,000 miles per year (834 miles per month.) It looked something like this in Structured Query Language: 

SELECT * FROM [veh list] WHERE [FY03 YTD Average miles driven per month] <= 834 

The result was that nearly half the ve- hicles were underused, according to the state's own guidelines. 

We listed the agencies with the most underused vehicles by using the follow- ing query: 

SELECT Agency, count (*) FROM [veh list] WHERE [FY03 YTD Average Miles Driven per Month] <= 834 GROUP BY Agency ORDER BY count (*) DESC 

So we had a story, but we needed a good way to tell it. I spent a couple of days driving around the state Capi- tol, studying parking lots that held state vehicles. My photographer and I performed surveillance next to one of the lots, and watched as several state vehicles just sat there day after day. We now had one good visual el- ement to illustrate the issue. 

## Adding perspective 

Next, I contacted the state Depart- ment of Education and got a list of relatively inexpensive state programs that were facing the budget axe. We ended up profiling a program for un- derprivileged preschoolers and an- other that helped adults get their high school diplomas. 

The story boiled down to this: "State leaders say there is no money lying around to fund programs like preschool and adult education, but we found lots of extra tax dollars - literally 'parked' all over the state Capitol." 

The day the story aired, the governor held a news conference to announce an "efficiency review." Part of that re- view dealt with state vehicles. The governor pledged to get rid of the vehicles that did not meet the mini- mum mileage standards. She said one of the beneficiaries of the sav- ings would be education spending. 

In the end, the database work made up only a small part of the story, but it provided the real meat. Without my limited background in CAR, I would have never thought to look for wasted tax dollars in a parking lot. 

Contact Morgan Loew by e-mail at Morgan.Loew@meredith.com 

September October 2003


3


www.ire.org 

Bits & Bytes

continued from page 2


help in a hurry at IRE's "In the News," online at www.ire.org/ inthenews archive. 

When power blackouts hit New York and other major cit- ies in the U.S. and Canada, a special "In the News" section listed useful databases, publi- cations, Internet sites and other resources. For instance, the site linked to several data- base and spreadsheet files from the Energy Department's Energy Information Adminis- tration. Also, the IRE and NICAR Database Library has data on federal contracts that includes the company, contact information, agency, type of work performed and place where the work was per- formed. Certainly there were companies with federal con- tracts involved in the blackout. 

## New Beat Book 

# Contracts continued from page 1 

From lobbying to loopholes, soft money to hard money, report- ers will find useful information and inspiration in "Unstacking the Deck: A Reporter's Guide To Campaign Finance." Written by veteran journalists Michael A. Weber, Aron Pilhofer and Derek Willis, this is the latest publica- tion in IRE's Beat Book series. It includes chapters on gather- ing documents and data and using campaign finance data- bases, such as those from the Federal Election Commission. There's also information on find- ing local and state data, and put- ting together your own database. The book costs $15 for IRE mem- bers and $25 for nonmembers. For details, see www.ire.org/ store/books/campaign.html or call 573-882-3364. 

probe, involving the FBI and at least three other agencies. Investigators raided at least two companies with ties to Stamps, and a federal grand jury subpoenaed hundreds of thousands of e-mail messages based on information unearthed by our reporting. 

No charges have resulted so far, but the grand jury is continuing its probe. 

Unlike a lot of investigations, this one didn't begin with a tip. Instead, it be- gan from mere curiosity during a brain- storming session. 

With Tennessee having just enacted the largest tax increase in state history, my photojournalist partner Bryan Staples and I wondered who was get- ting taxpayers' money. It was a ques- tion that couldn't be answered easily without a computer. 

## Getting records 

First, using Tennessee's Public Records Law, I requested a database of state contracts. In fact, this request was the easiest part of the process. The state's Department of Finance and Administra- tion quickly e-mailed the data in a .dbf file, which was then imported to Access. It contained hundreds of records, which required a targeted approach. 

Among the fields of information was a description of the bidding process, in- cluding one that I immediately found of great interest: "noncompetitive" con- tracts. Those are contracts that are awarded without any sort of bidding process because the vendors are deemed to offer a unique service un- available anywhere else. 

Slicing out the no-bid contracts from the data, I then began to background the companies involved in some of the larger contracts. To accomplish that, I began with a basic Web search, then moved on to AutotrackXP's online pub- lic record service. 

One contract, with a company called Workforce Strategists, set off immedi- ate alarms. 

The company had been awarded a $1.9 million no-bid contract to provide intensive counseling and coaching to help the unemployed get back to work. A "sole source memo" to justify the contract, also available in electronic form from budget officials, claimed Workforce Strategists was "the only company in Tennessee that has expe- rience" for the job. 

A quick check of the Tennessee Sec- retary of State's corporation informa- tion Web site revealed that the com- pany had been incorporated just six days before that memo was written. 

"Obviously, with six days, their experi- ence is rather limited," Rep. Buck said. 

In fact, the secretary of state's Web site also gave us the company's mailing address: Stamps' insurance office. At the time Stamps was completely un- known to us. But a quick check of newspaper articles through NewsLibrary newspaper archive re- vealed that he was a former business partner of the governor's. 

And there was more. 

A search of the state Web site re- vealed Stamps' role as a registered lobbyist for Education Networks of America (ENA), which had received more than $180 million in state con- tracts to provide Internet service to Tennessee schools. 

I had remembered reading a note on ENA's Web site that its work for the state began as a sole source, or no-bid, contract. But the note was no longer posted there, and state of- ficials denied it. However, a search of a Web archive produced the document I had remembered and gave us evidence to take back to state officials. 

But we weren't finished asking ques- tions with the computer. 

4


September October 2003


Uplink


Next, I returned to utoTrackXP and began running every query that could imagine. I ran a personal and business history of John Stamps, a history of all known businesses listed at the same address as Workforce Strategists, as well as a history of all other companies that shared the same registered agent as Workforce Strategists. 

The result was the discovery of three sister companies: 

One, Privatization Strategies, was part owner of Workforce Strategists. And it turned out that Privatization Strategies had been set up with the help of an attorney who was formerly a special assistant to Sundquist. 

A second, Comprehensive Community Care (CCC), included then-Deputy Gov. Alex Fischer as one of its offic- ers. A quick Google search led to the discovery that CCC was financed from the state's controversial TennCare health insurance program. 

in addition, Stamps had also set up another corporation, ComTraining.Net, a company run by Fischer's wife and the wife of the state's economic devel- opment commissioner. We discovered that ComTraining.Net had provided training for Comprehensive Commu- nity Care, again using taxpayer money through TennCare. 

Even though the Sundquist administra- tion insisted there was nothing im- proper about such arrangements, we found information about TennCare con- tracts on the state's Web site and dis- covered that they prohibit contractors from paying money "directly or indi- rectly" to state officials. 

On top of that, Stamps was also a lob- byist for two other state contractors who received tens of millions of dol- lars of taxpayer money. 

Interestingly, our AutoTrackXP search also revealed that Stamps filed for bankruptcy just days after Sundquist had been sworn into office in Janu- 

ary 1995. He had claimed $1.1 mil- lion in debt, with just $45,000 in an- nual income. A state database showed that, after he filed for bank- ruptcy, Stamps registered to become a Capitol Hill lobbyist. 

And there was more. Despite Stamps' bankruptcy, state campaign finance databases revealed that he was handing out campaign contributions to help those who were helping him, including $1,000 to Sundquist's re- election campaign. 

## E-mail messages 

But perhaps the most revealing infor- mation came from ENA e-mail mes- sages obtained by the station. 

Those messages revealed that ENA officials, including Stamps, had helped to write a sweeping reading initiative proposed by Sundquist. 

In an e-mail labeled "extremely con- fidential and not to be discussed out- side of ENA," company officials said that they had just negotiated a con- tract that would provide an extra $40 million a year. 

That e-mail, which focused on the governor's reading initiative, was writ- ten before Sundquist had even pre- sented his plan to state lawmakers. 

"I think this would have sent up red flags - I know it would have," said state Rep. Gene Davidson, one of the House's leading education experts as he read the message for the first time. "My reaction would be that someone thought it was a done deal." 

Lawmakers approved the plan, al- though it was never funded because of the state's budget crisis. 

Other e-mail suggested the role of politics in those state contracts. In one message, ENA President Al Ganier had instructed his employees: "Our sales efforts are built on the con- cept that all of us are involved in re- lationship building for improvements in existing contracts." 

About two months later, a team of fed- eral and state agents searched the company, seizing records and copying computer hard drives. 

Our investigation prompted legisla- tors to pass a new law that requires more scrutiny of no-bid contracts. Tennessee's new governor, Phil Bredesen, invited us to privately wit- ness his signing of the legislation. And he has imposed his own tighter controls. 

"It's primarily an issue," the new gov- ernor said, "of having the public have some confidence that what we are do- ing is in their interests." 

Contact Phil Williams by e-mail at pwilliams@newschannel5.com. 

readme.txt


Phil Williams and Bryan Staples of WTVF-Nashville won a Certificate in the 2002 IRE Awards for "Friends in High Places." 

To order a transcript of the stories, a tape or both, contact the IRE Resource Center at 573-882-3364 or rescntr@ire.org and ask for Story No. 19649. IRE members can view a videostreamed excerpt of the report in the Broadcast Center area of the IRE Web site at www.ire.org/broadcast. 

Read the "Friends in High Places" stories on the Web at www.newschannel5.com/ content/investigates/1133.asp. 

September October 2003


5


www.nicar.org 

MAPPING The latest uses of mapping in news reporting. 

## Pinpointing polluters in Chicago area 

By Jeff Porter, IRE and NICAR 

Environmental reporting is a natu- ral - pun intended - for journal- ists looking to use their analytic mapping skills and find informa- tion for news stories. 



Environmental data that can be mapped from state and federal agencies is often a simple download away on the Internet. For example, go to the U.S. Environmental Pro- tection Agency Web site at www.epa.gov and search for the phrase "underground storage tank." You'll get a list of state agencies that manage data about leaking tanks and, often, links to that data. 

The environmental agencies often include the locations, reported in latitude and longitude, of regulated entities. For example, the Toxics Release Inventory data (www.epa.gov/tri) from the EPA in- cludes the latitude and longitude. A journalist using a geographic in- formation system can create a pin map based on those coordinates and, going further, use density mapping tools to show high con- centrations. 

The Toxics Release Inventory and 

Areabolship


other environmental datasets in- clude even more geographic infor- mation that can be mapped: coun- ties, cities and ZIP codes. While ZIP code areas may or may not have precise boundaries, most people know their own Zip codes. 

The IRE and NICAR Database Li- brary recently used those geo- graphic elements when it assisted WMAQ-Chicago in pinpointing con- taminated sites targeted for cleanup by the Illinois Environmental Protec- tion Ageny. The data included haz- ardous waste sites and leaking un- derground storage tanks. The Da- tabase Library used ArcView 3.3 and the Spatial Analyst extension to conduct the analysis. 

The data, obtained by station pro- ducer Michele Youngerman, came from the Illinois EPA in dBASE files, easily opened in ArcView after we cleaned up the data using Visual Fox Pro to convert nine-digit ZIP codes to five-digit codes and convert the coordinates from text to number. 

(A note of caution about latitudes 

6


September October 2003


Uplink


and longitudes: Make sure you have them reported properly. ArcView 3.x requires decimal de- grees. Occasionally the coordi- nates are reported in degrees, minutes and seconds and will have to be converted.) 

After we cleaned up the data, our analysis took several steps. 

1. We created a point map using the numeric latitude and longitude coordinates via the View\Add Event Theme menu command. 
2. The first map was too laden with dots; we wanted to restrict our re- sults. So we used the definition query tool to include only larger polluters. 
3. With some advice from GIS ex- pert Matthew Waite of the St. Pe- 

Interstate

iterstate (IL) 88

interstate 80


Area.shp 1 24 25 - 49 50 - 79 80 - 129 130 * 203 

tersburg Times, we used the Spa- tial Analyst extension to identify "hot spots" of regulated sites. The resulting density maps weren't pretty, but they helped us focus on specific areas and confirmed some suspicions for the station. 

4. We limited the maps to the spe- cific ZIP codes provided by WMAQ 



that define its viewing area by us- ing definition queries. Then we used ArcView's Geoprocessing wizard extension to clip base map layers - roads, cities and rivers - for just the viewing area. 

5. Using the clipped data, we summarized the number of regu- lated sites by ZIP code and mapped the results. 

The resulting maps highlighted ar- eas where large polluters - gen- erating, hauling or managing haz- ardous materials - are also close to residential areas. The television station reported about thousands of contaminated sites near homes and playgrounds, although homeowners often don't know about the contamination. The analysis also helped give perspec- tive for the story of three families facing serious illness. All three families believe the illnesses were 

caused by companies releasing toxic waste. 

The stories can be found at: www.nbc5.com/nbc5/22037681 detail.html 

Contact Jeff Porter by e-mail at jeff@ire.org. 

Would you be willing to share a mapping example with fellow journalists? Send an electronic copy of the map along with details to David Herzog at dherzog@nicar.org 

September
October 2003


7


viait dur www.ire.org 

# SPOTLIGHT: POLLUTION Mapping soil tests shows legacy of lead 

By Tina Lam and Wendy Wendland-Bowyer, Detroit Free Press 

Lead poisoning is still a big problem in Detroit and other Michigan cities. Because many of our readers think it is old news, we wanted to bring a fresh perspective. 

"We didn't want to write an anecdotal story," said Alison Young, then project editor and now an investigative re- porter for Knight Ridder's Washington bureau. "We wanted to break news and give readers new information that would get their attention." Our early research showed little had been done to alert the public to the dangers of lead-contaminated soil and the legacy of long-forgotten lead smelters. 

Eight reporters, a data analyst and three photographers spent seven months working on a series published in Janu- ary. We interviewed 300 people, exam- ined more than 10,000 pages of docu- ments, filed a dozen public records re- quests and performed computer-as- 

sisted reporting. Since January, we've written follow-ups and three other major stories, including an analysis of a state database of children's lead test results. 

We hired a soil expert who has studied lead left in soil from leaded gasoline Howard Mielke, professor of environ- mental toxicology at Xavier University. His team took more than 400 soil samples, spread randomly along lines drawn through the Detroit metro area, from downtown radiating out into the suburbs. They used global positional satellite gear to determine where to dig each sample and then tested them in their lab in New Orleans for lead and other heavy metals. 

When we got the soil test data, it arrived with coordinates of where each sample was taken. Victoria Turk, our data ana- lyst, loaded the data into the ArcView 3.2 geographic information system (GIS) program to plot the locations of samples 

C
ArcYiew GN 0.20
JOIX
 E
E-D
View
Ihome
Graphics
Window
Hab
INC
Themes

Scott

Lensos Tract 5065

⑉
Census Tract 5065

7 Mile Rd.

59 ppm

382 ppm

256
ppm

161
(ppm

47
ppm
196
[ppm
232 jppm
 pbm
208
ppm
242
(ppm

34
ppm

173 ppm

98
ppm

ppm

244 ppm

638
ppm
51
ppm
112
ppm

177
ppm

E Nevada St

Inhea Microsoft Outlook
ArcView GIS 32a


using the latitude and longitude coordi- nates. She then placed the sample point file over a streets layer and on printed maps. Turk also added a map layer con- taining the locations of schools hosting children from kindergarten through fifth grade to see how close they were to the contamination locations. Turk obtained the school data from the National Cen- ter for Education Statistics Web site (http://nces.ed.gov) and geocoded it in ArcView to create a point map. 

Turk had to convert the schools data to match the projection of the soil sample layer. 

Using the sample maps, reporters and photographers fanned out, interviewing people who lived near the spots we'd sampled. The research showed that lead was highest in the soil in the inner city, with levels dropping near and in the sub- urbs. Our story talked about similar find- ings in other cities and the fact that some scientists think contaminated soil is as great a contributor to lead poisoning among children as lead paint and dust. 

One of the five days of the series was devoted to a defunct lead smelter in Detroit and the Environmental Protec- tion Agency's failure to notify people nearby that lead might have blown into their homes and yards. We asked the Xavier University team to return to De- troit and sample areas around the smelter. They found elevated levels. The EPA had taken just seven samples before determining there was no neigh- borhood contamination. We did 100 and found that there was contamina- tion, some of the levels astronomically high. Turk again used ArcView to map the results. She also used EPA's TRI Explorer on the Web (www.epa.gov/ triexplorer) to find out how much lead and lead compounds had been emit- ted in the three counties near Detroit. 

Our series included graphics showing what we found. It also had plenty of hu- man tales, portraits of families all over the state who had been affected by lead poisoning. One story focused on how the city and state fumbled efforts to abate houses for lead paint and left 

8


September October 2003


Uplink 

millions of dollars unspent or used on homes where no children lived. 

During the project, we filed a FOIA re- quest asking the Michigan Department of Community Health for its database of the results of all blood-lead tests for young children during the previous five years. The state requires that all clin- ics or physicians who do blood-lead tests report them to the state. After denying the database existed, the state eventually agreed to give it to us, but only on paper and only for $2,445. It was already too late for the series. But we sued the Department of Commu- nity Health in January in Oakland County Circuit Court and won our case and $10,000 in attorney fees in June. 

The state provided nearly half a mil- lion records with names redacted. The main fields were a specimen ID (unique for each test, not each child), test date, result and the child's birth date, ad- dress to the block level, race and sex. We wanted to find the most-poisoned blocks in the state and see whether health officials were targeting them. 

Megan Christensen, a former NICAR data analyst interning at the Free Press, joined us on the story. We used VEDIT to remove formatting glitches in the origi- nal file and then ran the addresses through ParseRat to separate a single field into components, such as block, street, direction and P.O. Box. We wanted a clean block and street number for each record. (For more about ParseRat, see p. 16 in this issue of Uplink). 

The state had rounded the house num- bers to the 100s. For example, 1500 Elm represented all houses from 1450 Elm to 1549 Elm, so that's how we defined our blocks. But we also had to separate Southwest Elm from Northeast Elm. We had to visit some of the streets and cross- reference others in street directories to make sure we had it right. 

Once we separated the records by block, we had to throw out the duplicates. Some records were redundant because the same child was tested in multiple years. Because we had no names, we settled 

for a grouping of birth date, race, sex and address to identify each child. Unfortu- nately, we did not come up with a reliable programming solution to throw out dupli- cates. Instead, we used Microsoft Access to query the data and group results by block. Then we printed out block results and picked out the duplicates by hand based on matches of birth date, race and sex. Then we ran new block sums to de- termine how many separate children were poisoned on each block. 

This forced us to focus on only the top 10-15 blocks because it would have been too time consuming for every block statewide. Had we been able to eliminate all the duplicates, the story would have produced more concrete numbers. But we were still able to fo- cus on the blocks with the most poison- ings and report on those families. 

The analyst for the Michigan Depart- ment of Community Health admitted they'd never done this. He thought the data was too dirty to eliminate double counting, so had never attempted it. Our story showed that most health officials didn't know which were the worst blocks and were not targeting those areas. The state had even denied funding to one county with some of the worst blocks. 

Our lead stories have triggered results. Embarrassed health officials have already started knocking on doors in the poisoned blocks that we found. Days after the Janu- ary series ended, the EPA announced it would finish the cleanup of the abandoned lead smelter and sample the yards near it. The agency set up a satellite office in the neighborhood, got permission to test widely and discovered that 75 percent of the homes they sampled within one-quar- ter mile of the smelter had lead-contami- nated yards. They're working on clean- ing them up. 

After another story we did on 16 other old smelters in Detroit that hadn't been investigated, the state sent environmen- tal officials to examine every site. They've discovered that all but three were indeed lead smelters and could still be causing contamination. Soil sam- pling is in the works. 

Our lead stories also led directly to leg- islation requiring inspectors to check for lead in day care centers. In August the governor introduced a 33-page plan to mount a new attack on lead poisoning, citing our work in the second paragraph. It should generate new legislation on several fronts, including requiring more lead testing and penalizing landlords who don't repair lead-contaminated apartments. We'll be watching. 

Contact Tina Lam by e-mail at lam@freepress.com. 

Contact Wendy Wendland-Bowyer by e-mail at wendland@freepress.com. 

readme.txt 

Here are some databases journalists can use when reporting on lead poisoning: 

Child blood-lead test data - often contains a record for each lead poisoning test. Children who are lead poisoned often will receive follow-up tests so they can have more than one record. Data should include the test result, type of test (finger stick or blood draw, for example), date of test, gender, race and age of the child. 

Environmental lead inspection data - contains detailed information about properties inspected for the presence of lead. Since this data identifies properties rather than poisoned kids, agencies may be more willing to provide a detailed street address. You can also get the name of the owner, test results, building type and inspection results. 

Abatement loan data - contains information about loans granted by public agencies and housing authorities to homeowners for correcting lead paint hazards. The information includes loan recipient, home address, abatement address, loan amount and loan due date. 

September October 2003


9


IRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

SPOTLIGHT: POLLUTION 

# Showing sources, effects of emmissions By James Bruggers and Mark Schaver, The (Louisville, Ky.) Courier-Journal 

Data analysis played a major role in two recent projects that showed the severity of dirty air in Louisville and identified the area's biggest polluters. 

Stories published in May showed how the city's dirty air could cause a sig- nificant number of additional cancers and other health problems, and that the concentrations of certain chemi- cals were hundreds of times higher than levels considered safe by pollu- tion regulators. 

In June the newspaper followed up with a six-page special section that contained graphics pinpointing the sources of pollution and looked at emissions trends. 

We used Microsoft Access, Excel, ArcView 8.3 geographic information system and Perl to wrestle with large quantities of data from local and fed- eral air pollution regulators. 

For the first project, environmental reporter James Bruggers, under the Kentucky open records law, obtained air-sampling results in an Excel spreadsheet from the Louisville Metro Air Pollution Control District. The district enforces the federal Clean Air Act in Louisville. 

The spreadsheet contained, among other things, the average, median and 95-percent upper confidence limit val- ues for 13 monitoring stations spread over the Louisville area, as well as the number of times an individual chemi- cal had been detected over a 12- month period in 2000 and 2001. Roughly 100 of about 160 chemicals that were sampled had been detected at least once during that period. 

To see which of those chemicals might be of concern, we wanted to compare 

the monitoring results with health-risk benchmarks developed by two regional offices (San Francisco and Philadel- phia) of the U.S. Environmental Protec- tion Agency. We downloaded them from the Web. The EPA lacks national benchmarks. These thresholds are sometimes called risk-based concen- trations or preliminary remediation goals and were developed for screen- ing potential toxic dumps. 

We decided that we would focus on chemicals whose concentrations ex- ceeded both benchmarks. We used Access to join the air sampling results table with the threshold tables. We joined the tables using the unique Chemical Abstracts Service number that identified each chemical, 

Then we calculated a ratio showing which chemicals exceeded the thresh- olds. We exported the results into Ex- cel and used conditional formatting to highlight in red the sites that exceeded the thresholds. 

A week before we published the sto- ries, the Philadelphia regional office posted a revised set of screening lev- els, which required us to perform our analysis again. Fortunately, there were only a few changes. 

Our results were striking: Concentra- tions of at least 18 toxic chemicals and compounds measured in the air ex- ceeded EPA benchmarks. Some were at levels hundreds of times higher than what the government considers ac- ceptable. Concentrations of one chemi- cal, the human carcinogen 1,3-butadi- ene, were 2,400 times higher than the EPA health threshold at one sampling site. With ArcView, we produced a map showing where the air samples were taken and used proportional symbols to show the relative quantity of butadi- 

ene emissions measured at each. 

The number crunching was fairly straightforward; the real difficulty was making sure, through interviews with a variety of experts, that the newspaper's analysis was legitimate. So we talked to university-based toxi- cologists, environmental statisticians, former environmental regulators and physicians. We also relied heavily on federal government Web sites for in- formation about the chemicals and compounds that we found in high con- centrations. 

After the stories ran, the newspaper obtained a just-completed environ- mental consulting firm's draft analy- sis of the air sampling results that confirmed our findings of a significant air quality problem. 

## Finding polluters 

Next we wanted to analyze data to find pollution sources and examine trends. This is where it got a little complicated: There's more than one database with emissions information, and some of the data overlap. Some databases track emissions for which there are no na- tional air standards, while others track emissions for which there are stan- dards. And, because reporting rules have changed over the years, it can be difficult to identify yearly trends. 

We started by analyzing the granddaddy of all pollution inventories: the EPA's Toxics Release Inventory, which tracks emissions of some 650 different chemicals. This data is avail- able on the Web at www.epa.gov/tri, and can be easily sorted and manipu- lated using the EPA's Web-based in- terface; it can also be downloaded and put into Excel for additional analysis. We did both. 

When we examined countywide trends, we limited our analysis to what the EPA calls its "1995 core chemicals," and "original industries." This gave us most of the chemicals and most of the in- dustries, excluding power plants, which we analyzed separately. By slicing the data this way, we found that overall TRI 

10


September October 2003


Uplink


emissions in Louisville-Jefferson County had declined 39 percent be- tween 1988 and 2001. 

We had a spreadsheet for each year and combined the data into a single worksheet to make it easier to look at year-to-year trends. We used Excel pivot tables to quickly summarize data for each company. 

When we examined the emissions trends from the top 25 TRI sources, we used the EPA's Envirofacts Ware- house, a very useful online resource, at www.epa.gov/enviro. Its emissions data is more current, and includes yearly releases for each facility on one screen. After a few points and clicks, a color-coded trend chart popped up on our computer screen. 

TRI, however, fails to account for all emissions. Other categories of pollut- ants are reported by industry and com- piled into different databases that can be obtained from the EPA, and some- times, state and local environmental agencies. We obtained ours from the local air pollution control district. 

The agency at first told us that it didn't keep the records in a form that our computers could understand. But they agreed to extract the data we were re- quested and gave it to us electronically. Some came in an Excel spreadsheet; others in text tables. 

To get the data in a useful form, we used a Perl script to loop through the text files, pulling out the name of each plant and the pollutants associated with it. 

With this data, we used Excel to rank each source of industrial pollution for each category of pollutant, and de- termined yearly trends. Some of what we found we expected, such as the major emissions from power plants. But we also found that a bourbon dis- tillery was the largest source of vola- tile organic compounds, a contribu- tor to summer smog. The alcohol va- pors that escape from aging casks of Old Forester and Early Times are called "the angel's share" by industry 

insiders and are unregulated. 

We ran our results by the local air pol- lution officials as well as some of the companies that came out on top. We then realized that one of the databases we had was faulty. The computer pro- gram that local air officials had used to extract the data on hazardous air pol- lutants had left some industries out. The local officials fixed the problem, and we ran our analysis again. 

With stories, maps and charts, we pre- sented a complete picture of industrial air pollution sources in Louisville. While much attention over the years had been focused on an area with 11 chemical plants, our analysis identified major sources far from there. We found that a single power plant in Indiana just across the Ohio River from Louisville produced more TRI emissions than two Louisville based power plants com- bined. We found that particulates, which can damage lungs and cause cancer, had increased by 76 percent since 1988, and that the hazardous air pollutants were on the rise since 1998. 

At the same time, we showed that in- dustrial emissions of volatile organic compounds had declined by 60 percent since 1988. 

We used graphics and maps to help tell the story and keep most of the num- bers there. Readers could identify the plants nearest them, and then see whether air emissions were going up or down at those facilities. 

In ArcView, we made a map showing the location of the 50 counties in the U.S. with the highest air emissions based on the TRI data. We used ArcView's graduated symbols feature to show the relative size of each of those counties' emissions. We wanted to compare our county to others in the nation, and found Louisville-Jefferson County ranked 23rd. 

We told the story through the people who work in these plants and those who live nearby. We also followed up the special section with a package on 

how University of Louisville medical experts had identified certain "asthma clusters" in Louisville, and that many people with asthma in Louisville blame poor air quality on making their medi- cal condition worse. 

Contact James Bruggers by e-mail at jbruggers@courier-journal.com. 

Contact Mark Schaver by e-mail at imschaver@courier-journal.com. 

readme.txt 

Read the Courier-Journal pollution stories on the Web at www.courier-journal.com/ cjextra/2003projects/toxicair/. 

The federal government provides information about pollutants and toxics on some of its Web sites. The Environmental Protection Agency offers fact sheets about the health effects of air pollutants at www.epa.gov/ttn/ Latw/hapindex.html and the Integrated Risk Information System database of information about possible human health effects from various substances at www.epa.gov/iris. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Web site contains toxicological profiles of chemicals at www.atsdr.cdv toxpro2.html. 

You can find the benchmark data that the Courier-Journal used in its analysis of possible health risks at the EPA Philadelphia regional office Web site (www.epa.gov/ reg3hwmd/risk/index.htm) and the San Francisco regional office Web site (www.epa.gov/ region09/waste/sfund/prg/ index.htm). 

September October 2003


11


with our www.nicar.org 

SPOTLIGHT: POLLUTION 

# Squeezing trends from air emissions data 

By Russell Clemings, The Fresno Bee 

Even the experts can't agree on the best way to find long-term trends in air pollution data. But we had to figure something out for our "Last Gasp" project, which made the point that air pollution was worsening in parts of California's Central Valley even as it improved in Los Angeles. 

Here's what we did. Our data came from California's Air Resources Board, which offers a free CD with data, maps and a nifty interactive program for dis- playing both. The board has a Web site 

(www.arb.ca.gov/aqd/aqdcd/ aqdcd.htm) with downloadable hourly monitoring data back to 1980. 

Most of the data is in dBASE files that can be imported into Microsoft Access with a couple of keystrokes. From there, you can construct queries to extract data for a single monitoring sta- tion (station ID numbers and locations are in a separate file) and export the resulting data to Excel. 

The files have readings for a dozen pol- 

Chart Wizard - Step 2 of 4 - Chart Source Data

Data Range
Series

OZMAXIHR

0.18
 0.16
 0.14
 0.12

0,1

0.08
OZMAX
 0.06
 0.04
 0.02

Data range:
*3026'$A$1:$8$3402

Series in:
Rows

Columns

?
Cancel
< Back
Next A
Finish


lutants, presented more than 20 differ- ent ways. Unfortunately, the raw data is just a jumble of numbers. Even if you scanned the entire file from top to bot- tom, it would be impossible to figure out the trend. 

You can use the Excel Chart Wizard to create, for example, a line graph for the date and one-hour ozone levels, but even that doesn't help much. (see graphic on this page) 

Because ozone is a summertime pol- lutant, the levels are high in the sum- mer and approach zero in the winter. If you eyeball the graph, it looks as if the summertime peaks are edging upward, but it's hard to say for sure. 

What we needed was a way to boil down these peaks and valleys to a long-term trend. 

One of the ways that statisticians find pat- terns in data is to do a linear regression, and Excel fortunately has a built-in way to add a regression line to the chart we built, After you've finished the chart, just right-click on the data line and click Add Trendline, and you can lay down a nice, clean regression line over the data. 

Doing that may show what appears to be a long-term rising trend in the data. There's just one thing wrong: As any competent statistician will tell you (and lucky for us, one did), a simple linear re- gression doesn't work with data that in- volves a time series like this one. The seasonal pattern in this data is so strong that it overwhelms any other pattem that a regression analysis might show you. 

This problem is not unique to air pollu- tion data. Economists run into it when they're studying things like retail sales, which rise and fall with the calendar. And there are tools available for deal- ing with it, such as the Census Bureau's X-ARIMA model. But even if you have the intellectual capacity to use something like that, you're still left with a significant problem - explaining it to your readers. Just saying, "Trust me, my computer says there's a trend here" probably isn't the best approach. 

12


September October 2003


Uplink 

0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0


Here's another alternative: A 365-day (or annual) moving average. It's not too hard to explain: for each day, it's just the average of the past year's daily values. That's why it's called a "moving" average. If today is June 5, 2003, then the 365-day moving aver- age for today is the average of all daily values from June 6, 2002 through today. Tomorrow's 365-day moving average, in turn, would be the average of daily values from June 7, 2002 through June 6, 2003. 

Here's how you write a formula to get that from Excel. Suppose you have date labels in column A and data for several years in column B. Calculate the first annual average in cell C366 with this formula: =average(b2:b366 

Copy that formula down and graph the result, and you can say with some confi- dence that the 1990s saw one-hour daily ozone peaks decline edge upward or downward, or remain about the same, depending on the data. The above chart shows contrasting trends (using the 365- day moving average) at two stations - one in southern California that is declin- ing and one in the San Joaquin Valley near Fresno that is rising somewhat. 

At this point in our reporting, we are ready for quality control. When we did this in real life, we showed our graphs to various experts at the state and lo- cal air pollution control agencies. We 

also explained how we did the analy- sis and asked for their comments on it. 

All agreed that the 365-day moving av- erage was a valid way to show the long-term trend. But one expert went a step further. He encouraged us to throw out the winter values and look only at the summer data. His reason- ing: Although no one knows for sure, it's considered likely that very low lev- els of ozone are not a health threat. The state's one-hour ozone standard of 0.09 parts per million is exceeded regularly in the summer. But in win- ter, typical levels are far less than that. And an increase from 0.02 to 0.03 is clearly not as important as an increase from 0.12 to 0.13. Yet our 365-day moving average would re- gard them both as important. 

# REQUIRED READING For Your Newsroom 

## Unstacking the Deck: 

A Reporter's Guide to Campaign Finance by Michael A. Weber, Aron Pilhofer and Derek Willis 

This invaluable guide for pursuing stories about the impact of money on elections, political parties and candidates at the federal, state and local levels is packed with story tips, resources and Web sites. 

UNSTACKING
 THE DECK
 A Reporter's Guide
 to Campaign Finance


ORDER TODAY! Call 573-882-3364 with your VISA or MasterCard -OR- Visit our Web site at www.ire.org/store for online ordering or order form downloads IRE MEMBERS: $15 each NONMEMBERS: $25 each 

The expert suggested a number of al- ternative approaches. We finally chose one that was doubly elegant, being both easy to calculate and easy to explain. For each year, we calculated and plot- ted just one value - the average daily peak for the summer smog season, May 1 through Oct. 31. (see chart below) 

You can read the "Last Gasp" project on the Web at www.valleyairquality.com 

Contact Russell Clemings by e-mail at clemings@cris.com. 

0.14

0,12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1996
1999


September October 2003


13


JRE Untabase 573.884.7711 

# Tech tip... Making sense of Navy aviation crash data By Richard O'Reilly, Los Angeles Times 

The Naval Aviation Safety Database was one of the research sources for the Los Angeles Times' Pulitzer Prize- winning series on the U.S. Marine Corps Harrier attack fighter jet. The four-part series, published Dec. 15- 2002, also won an IRE Certificate. 

Reporters Alan C. Miller and Kevin Sack found the bulk of their mate- rial through numerous interviews and nearly 90 Judge Advocate Gen- eral accident reports obtained un- der Freedom of Information Act re- quests. But an analysis of the Har- rier through the Naval Aviation Safety data provided scope, context and nuance to the project. 

Brief summaries from the database are available on the Navy Safety Cen- ter Web site, www.safetycenter.navy.mil The full database must be re- quested via FOIA from Josie Bowden, 757-444-3520, ext. 7045 (JBowden@safety.center. navy.mil). 

It took us months to get the database after filing the request. And when we received it, we found that data from 218 fields, about 27 percent of the 807 fields then in the database, were omitted on privacy and national se- curity grounds. An appeal failed. What we got instead was the brief public summary of recent Harrier ac- cidents supplied by e-mail. It was ex- actly the same data we could have copied from their Web site, which was useless for analytical purposes. 

Virtually all of the extensive narra- tive fields contained in the database were excluded. That had the effect of removing all conclusionary infor- mation. Personnel data on injuries, causes and even the severity of in- juries was withheld. Gender, date of 

birth, rank and unit were provided. But the field containing first and last initials was omitted. 

Also missing were fields that iden- tified recurring problems, identified instances in which planes were not in compliance with Marine stan- dards and in which problem parts had been cannibalized from other aircraft. A field that provided a de- tailed identification of the compo- nent damage or failure was omit- ted. However, a field that identified materials or components involved in the incident was provided. 

Data on Marine aircraft are con- tained in the Navy database be- cause Marine funding is routed through the Navy, and the Navy is responsible for maintaining safety data for the Marines. 

What the Navy eventually provided was a complex, well-documented, clean set of related data tables in tab-delimited format. There is a mix of data tables and code tables. Many of the fields in the data tables are coded. Code translation tables were provided for each of the coded fields we received. However, the translation tables for coded fields that were omitted also were omitted. 

A large-format table relationship sheet was provided, as was a table list text file and a data dictionary text file. The table list (with the file name av_tablist.rtf) gave a simple list of table names, field names, types and sizes and whether the field was omit- ted or not. The dictionary file (av_dicty.txt) gave an English trans- lation of field names plus an expla- nation. For example, the field "bank_degs_left" in the table 

"av_actt_at_esc" was described as fol- lows: "LEFT BANK DEGREES-The left bank of the event aircraft in de- grees at the time of escape." 

Where fields were omitted in tables, the field place was held by a null value (hex 00) between the tab characters. That caused problems for me when reading the data into SAS. Therefore, I copied the original tables and then, using UltraEdit, did a search and re- place across all the file copies in one operation to translate a tab-null-tab string into a tab-space-tab string. 

Some of the code fields proved to contain hierarchical codes, which were not explicitly documented. An example is "incdt_phase_ops_c" in the table "av_incdt_occurn." It is described in the dictionary as "Sig- nificant Incident Phase Operation~The phase of operation in which the event aircraft was engaged, at the time the coded subject signifi- cant incident occurred, in the evolu- tion of the reportable event." 

An example entry in the three-char- acter field is "33Z." The code transla- tion table renders that as "No further breakdown," which is meaningless. In the same code translation table, how- ever, you find that "3" translates as "Takeoff forward motion on run/cata- pult until attaining climb schedule." And "33" translates into "Aircraft breaks ground climb schedule not yet attained." In other words, that single three-character field can be decoded into three separate, related meanings. 

There are other examples. The five- character field "imc_c" in the table "av_eng_cmpnt" is described in the dictionary as "Involved Material Component~Identifies the Naval 

14


September October 2003


Uplink


Safety Center code relating to the category of the event aircraft's com- ponent or engine (power plant)." 

One such entry is "T1007", which is translated in the field code table as "Compressor pressure limiter sec- tion." The "T" alone translates into "Turbo-jet engine," and the first three characters, "T10," mean "Regulator- not detailed." Thus the code must be parsed to gain its full meaning. 

My solution for all of the hierarchical codes (which were identified by in- specting the code table translations for partial string definitions) was to create new fields in the table to con- tain just the partial strings that had separate meanings. Thus I created an "imc_a" field that was only the first character of "imc_c," and an "imc_b" field containing the first three charac- ters of "imc C." This was easily done because all of the hierarchical fields contained the full complement of characters specified in the table list and dictionary files. 

The Naval Aviation Safety Database contains records (more than 48,000 in the mid-2002 version we re- ceived) of "events" from Jan. 1, 1980, to within the last several months. An event can range from a no-damage, no-injury maintenance or operational problem that could have a safety impact and thus meets the criteria for reporting, to loss of an aircraft and its crew. The most dramatic events are those known as "Class A," with at least $1 million in damage or fatal injury. 

There are three primary trajectories for analyzing the data - events, per- sons or aircraft - each of which uti- lizes its own key field for table joins. Within those trajectories there are subsidiary keys that join more de- tailed tables. As a result, you can end 

up with a lot of tables joined together, which can lead to a lot of rows being added as details embellish what started out as a single row for a single event. Much of the data will be con- stant and repeated on those rows, such as the total cost of the event, or the event category, or even the tail number of the aircraft. Other fields on the rows will contain unique data, as when several different components are involved, causing several rows from the component table to be joined to the aircraft table. 

Ultimately, it is necessary to recode and collapse data to analyze it ac- curately. There is a lot of missing data, beyond what was withheld. The data collected has undergone a number of revisions since 1980. Later events have more complete data than earlier events. Sometimes data is missing because it is not rel- evant to a particular event. 

To compute accurate percents for occurrences, the denominator has to be just the events for which the data exists. For instance, some reports for Class A events involving the Harrier did not have any data on the compo- nents involved. I created a new logi- cal field called Parts, with "Yes" mean- ing there was parts data and "No" when it was missing. Then when cal- culating the percentage of jet engine problems, for instance, I divided by the count of Parts = Yes. 

In some cases I forced empty records to sort at the bottom of a list instead of the top by recoding a blank field to "zzz." 

If the summary being created involves a number of fields, it probably will be necessary to make several interme- diate tables by doing record-by-record inspections and editing. That's be- cause it probably will not be possible 

to sort across several fields and end up with the data desired from each field rising to the top of the sort. 

The most important advice I can give is to be skeptical of every re- sult you derive and try to figure out an alternate way to get it. If you come up with the same result two different ways, it is probably reliable. But if you get different results, you'll need to figure out why and fix it. 

Contact Richard O'Reilly at richard.oreilly@latimes.com. 

readme.txt 

"The Vertical Vision" received a certificate in the large newspaper division of the 2002 IRE Awards. To order the stories and the contest entry form, which contains detailed information about the reporting of the project, contact the IRE Resource Center at 573-882-3364 or rescntr@ire.org and ask for Story No. 19777. 

IRE offers a detailed tipsheet (No. 1850) about analyzing the Navy crash data. IRE members can download the tipsheet from the IRE Resource Center Web page (www.ire.org/resourcecenter). 

For more about the reporting of the series, read "Harrier jet bedeviled with mechanical ills" in the May/June 2003 IRE Journal. 

The series and a related multimedia package are available on the Web at www.latimes.com/newsh specials/harrier. 

September
October 2003


15


www.nicar.org 

CAR TOOL 

# Using ParseRat to carve up names 

By James E. Wilkerson, The (Allentown, Pa.) Morning Call 

If you've ever sat in on a session about data cleaning at one of the annual IRE and NICAR computer-assisted report- ing conferences, you've heard one question that comes up again and again: "What about names?" 

Many of us have gazed longingly at a huge table containing jumbled names, wondering what sort of havoc we could wreak if we could just break them up into more manageable fields. 

A $50 program called ParseRat can do that by flashing through thou- sands of names in a few seconds to produce a nice, clean list parsed however you like. 

While I've primarily used ParseRat (www.guysoftware.com/ ParseRat.htm) to carve names, the program is capable of doing much more. The compact program file takes only a few minutes to download but 

can handle very large files in a vari- ety of formats, from the antiquated EBCDIC data exported from main- frames to data-heavy Web pages us- ing modern XML tagging. 

## ParseRat steps 

For example, you can easily grab large tables from Web pages and, with the help of scripts included with the pro- gram, modify them for importing into a spreadsheet or database manager. Or you can use the program to parse data from a simple .dbf or complicated CO- BOL file. In fact, you can grab text in just about any format: delimited, fixed- width, "tagged" with HTML, XML or other coding, among others. 

There are routines for converting un- usual date and time formats. The pro- gram can even convert from one measurement system to another, such as metric to U.S. standard, and allows you to write new conversion 

rules for measurements not included. 

ParseRat File Parser, Converter & Reorganizer
31x
 File Help View

Open
Output
Exit
?
Help

Inpul File documents
 Previous
Next
Mr. W. Scott Rhinehart III
 Record #

Input Type Output Combo Date Time
Street

1 Input FieldsField Names
Name
Phone
Mailing
City/State
Split
Gender
Misc
1 Output Fields Field Names
 Mr. w Scott Field
Please click on name source element(s) below. then click the
Output
 appropriate input field name(s) at the left (You may need only one.)
 Source Fields
Field
 Mr. Scott Rhinehari III

Elements below may be output as
3
4
5
 Parser Generated Fields in Output
 Title
Mr
 First Name
w
 Middle Name
Scott
 Last Name
Rhinehart
 Name Suffix
III

Sequence In
Std Name Infer Title from
Gender Options
Scott Rhineha
Positions Out
 Add
Titles Substitute Delete
Add
Suffix Substitute Delete
 Mr
Mr
Jr
Jr
 Mrs
Mrs
Sr
Sr

1,000 record test
Clear Output
 Dancel
2 chara

Tue May 20.10.66.42 2003


ParseRat will even take a stab at de- termining gender from names, and will generate Soundex codes useful for searching for names phonetically. But it's obvious from the start that ParseRat was created with mailing lists in mind and there are a bunch of built-in options to parse names, ad- dresses and phone numbers. 

The program's major drawback: The interface is somewhat complicated, with tons of options available through small buttons in an often-jumbled package. The help files have a home- made feel that can be confusing at times. But after spending an hour or so with the documentation, I was able to navigate around the program with relative ease. 

## First, preparation 

You should also be ready to do some prep work on your data before running it through ParseRat. I use a powerful but inexpensive text editor, UltraEdit, available for $35 at www.ultraedit.com There are a number of text editors out there and having one is a must, be- cause they can crank through very large text files that would choke a con- ventional desktop word processor such as Microsoft Word or the trusty Win- dows Notepad. 

Before using ParseRat, make sure all header information and extraneous material has been stripped from the top of the text because the program will use the first line of data to make judgment calls about parsing the en- tire file. The cleaner the file, the bet- ter the output, so take some time to ensure everything's as uniform and as clean as possible. I recommend iso- lating only those fields on which you want to work to keep things simple and speed up the process. 

Here's a walk-through on parsing names, which I do regularly. 

First, use your text editor to choose the most complicated name you can find and move it to the very top of the 

16


September October 2003


Uplink


list. By first showing ParseRat a name with the most elements - "Mr. James E. Wilkerson III," for example - you prime the program to look for all of those elements in each record. And, because you only get to see the first record when making pars- ing decisions, it's easier to do with a name that contains all of the pos- sible elements. 

Sometimes it's easier to make up that first name than dig through your data to find the perfect model. If you make up a name just remem- ber to delete it later. 

## Software interface 

After that, fire up ParseRat and choose Open\Input file and browse for the text file. The next screen will ask you to confirm the type of data - delimited, fixed width, etc. 

The interface gets pretty clunky here, but it's easy enough to navigate once you get the basics down. We will focus on the Input Type, Name and Output tabs. 

After confirming the text type, click on the Name tab. This is where you specify the field (or fields) containing the name you want to clean, and tell ParseRat what you want the output to look like. To the left of the tabs, you'll see an input selection to the left and an output indicator to the right. (You should have at least one field visible in the input section - if not, go back to the Input Type and try another type un- til you do.) 

Near the top of the dialog box, click on the first box available in the source fields input. Then, click on the appro- priate source field to the left. The name of that field will appear in the source fields box, and the first name in your text will appear in the ele- ments boxes underneath. 

ParseRat takes a stab at determin- ing the order in which the elements of the name appear, and ranks them from one to five using the radio but- tons to the left of the sample name, starting with "Title" and ending with 

ParseRat File Parser, Converter & Reorganizer
 File Help View

Open
Output
Exit
Help
D
Parte

Insid
File
 Elevious
NAXE
Mr
W. Scott Rhinehart III
 Record # 1

Name
Phone
Mailing
City/State
Split
Gender
Misc

1 Input FieldsField Names
Input Type
Output
Combo
Date
Time
Street
1
Output Fields Field Names
 Mr. W Scott
Field1
Output

Input ype

Web Form

Comma Delimited With Quoted Strings
 Tab Delimited Records
 Other Delimited Records
 Fixed Format Records
 Page Image Input and other multi-line blocks
 Binary Files View Start of File as Binary

Take First Record as Field Names

Copy all input fields to output fields

1,000 record test
Clear Output
 chars

Tue May 2003


the full name. You can change that order by clicking on the buttons. You can change the output order by us- ing the similar feature to the right of the sample name. 

After setting up the input and output order on the name tab, you need to specify the fields to output. Click on the Output tab to get a lot of options. The most important is the parser- generated fields, which show you the output that ParseRat will generate. Scroll down and take a look at the results to make sure they match your expectations. 

To the right of parser-generated fields is a small button labeled "Add Field." Clicking on that button will add a blank output field to the right of the dialog box. Count the number of fields you want to output and create that many blank fields with that button. 

## Choices, choices 

Click on the first output field at the far right and choose the parser-generated fields name that you want to place there by clicking on it. Click on the next out- put field name and do the same, repeat until you have all of the output fields you need in the order you want. 

If you want to keep the original record, place it in one of the output fields by click- ing on it at the far right of the dialog box. 

Make sure you have selected the ap- propriate output format - usually use comma-delimited text - and click the output button in the top tool bar. Then sit back and wait while ParseRat gen- erates your cleaned names. 

It should be obvious when you start poking around on it that the program is capable of much more than I touched on here. Take some time and read the documentation, and you'll soon be flying through parsing jobs you might have thought impossible. 

Contact James E. Wilkerson by e-mail at james.wilkerson@mcall.com. 

readme.tx 



Have a favorite CAR tool that Uplink readers should know about? Drop us a note at uplink@nicar.org and tell us about it. 

September
October 2003


17


# OPEN SOURCE New Linux offering great for serving data By Aron Pilhofer, Center for Public Integrity 

It used to be that all the tools a journalist doing computer-assisted reporting needed were a spreadsheet, database manager and a decent SQL book. But in these days of networked newsrooms with a PC on every desk, the CAR specialist's job has morphed to include such diverse skills as Web design, server-side scripting, database admin- istration and data warehousing. 

An increasing number of reporters and editors want access to data directly. They want the ability to do quick queries on multiple databases through an easy-to- use interface, such as an intranet Web form. The more tech-savvy journalists want to do their own data analysis using more advanced tools, such as Microsoft Access database manager. 

Stand-alone database managers (Ac- cess, FoxPro and the like) aren't well suited for the task of sharing data. For that, you need a central server capable of making data available over a network. 

Which brings us to Red Hat Linux 9.0, the latest version of the most popular Linux distribution on the market. After more than two months working with Red Hat 9.0, I can say that it is by far the best distribution of Linux ever released and an ideal solution for any newsroom look- ing to centralize its data operations at a fraction of the cost of other alternatives. 

Assuming you already have the hard- ware on hand, a very basic Microsoft Windows/Internet Information Server/ SQL Server installation will range from $2,500 to more than $10,000 (not in- cluding support) depending on features desired and number of users. 

Red Hat 9.0 can be downloaded for free. A boxed version costs $39.95 and comes with printed manuals and 30 days of Web-based support. Red Hat also sells 

higher end enterprise editions (the ES series) that range from $350 to $800 and come packaged with up to a year of live telephone support. 

Like all open-source software, Red Hat's license allows administrators freedom to install it on an unlimited number of servers accessible to any number of networked users. Microsoft generally requires a separate license for each user or system on which its software will be installed. 

As for support, both Microsoft and Red Hat charge for it. But while some kind of formal support is a nice safety net, it isn't absolutely necessary for Linux any longer because the installation, configu- ration and administration tools have improved so much in the past few years. 

And among the new breed of simpler, easier Linux releases, Red Hat 9.0 is without a doubt the best. 

## Installation 

The boxed version can be purchased at any major computer store, but the three installation disks can be down- loaded from the Red Hat Web site, ww.redhat.com/download/ products. html. Be aware that download- ing will take several hours even with a very fast Internet connection. The boxed version might be worthwhile for those new to Linux because of the printed documentation and support. 

Once you have the disks, installation should be a simple matter of booting from the CD and following on-screen instruc- tions. I installed Red Hat 9.0 on two desk- top configurations and a laptop without a hint of trouble. Users will most likely be able to simply select all the default settings and continue. 

Although there may be a few speed 

bumps along the way-especially for new users- the Red Hat Web site and printed documentation should cover these top- ics adequately. If not, there are several excellent Web sites that cover Linux ba- sics, including the Linux Documentation Project (www.tldp.org) and Linux Planet (www.linuxplanet.com). It might help to have an information technology person nearby just in case. 

Red Hat has made selecting the right mix of software a snap. Users can ini- tially select from several broad instal- lation categories such as server, work- station, desktop, and the appropriate software for that function will be in- stalled. Users can also customize their installation by selecting among the hundreds of individual applications that come packaged with Red Hat. 

Once the software has been selected, the actual installation should go auto- matically. Reboot and you should have a working Linux machine. 

## Software 

Red Hat 9.0 includes the two critical ap- plications any newsroom data center would need: a Web server and a high- end database application. 

Apache 2.x is the standard Web server packaged with Red Hat 9.0, and it's outstanding. It is by far the most popu- lar Web server in the world. According to the most recent statistics, roughly two of every three Web sites run Apache. 

It's popular because it is secure, stable and easy to set up. The default configu- ration probably will work just fine for in- ternal newsroom use but, if users need to tweak any settings, that can be done by editing a master configuration file. 

Red Hat 9.0 offers several database management solutions. The best is MySQL, which is optimized for speed, stability, reliability and power, and ideal for serving data. (For details see "My SQL primed for heavy-duty action" in the March-April 2003 Uplink). 

Goodbye stand-alone Access databases and random .dbf files floating around the 

18


September October 2003


Uplink


network. No more problems with cor- rupted data on deadline. So long to worries about users accidentally delet- ing or altering data. MySQL, like any high-end database server, allows ad- ministrators to give users just the amount of access they need and no more, or the ability to query a database but not to update or delete records. 

Red Hat 9.0 comes packaged with a number of scripting languages - PHP, Perl, Python, Ruby - and development tools that allow you to combine the power of Apache and MySQL to create simple Web-based database search pages. 

Although there are many ways of install- ing software under Red Hat, including compiling from source code, the simplest way is to use prepackaged applications called RPMs. Just as Windows has its .exe, the software packaged for Red Hat machines carries the .rpm extension. Several years ago, the company created a special program to handle RPMs called the Red Hat Package Manager, which works a little bit like the add/remove pro- grams control panel in Windows. 

RPM did make installing software easier, but it was far from perfect. As long as the user stuck to programs bundled with the distribution, things were fine. But users sometimes want to install more bleeding edge versions of programs, or applications that were not packaged with the system - and that could cause problems. 

Red Hat 9.0 solves this problem by sim- ply removing it. The new package man- ager will not install anything but the ap- plications that come with the Red Hat distribution. Users can install other RPMs, but that must be done from the command line, not through a graphical interface - an excellent compromise for newer users and power users alike. 

## Maintaining Red Hat 

more powerful because it updates not only the Linux operating system but any standard installed software. 

In addition to being easy to install, Red Hat also is simple to maintain because of the Red Hat Network. All users (even those who downloaded the software) are given access to it. RHN is similar to the Windows "update" feature but much 

Red Hat is quite good about posting bug fixes and updates to the Red Hat Network almost as quickly as they are released, thus ensuring that your sys- tem is as up to date as possible. 

Managing your server is easy and secure with Webmin (www.webmin.com), a Web-based ad- ministration tool that is bar none the best available. Administrators can administer a Linux server over a network or even over the Internet, although that is not recommended for security reasons. 

Webmin is simple to install, and very intuitive. It is also open source, mean- ing it is totally free. There are modules available to help manage everything from a firewall to user accounts to disk partitions. Webmin, unfortunately, is not among the standard packages that come with Red Hat 9.0, but its excel- lent documentation can be down- loaded from the Webmin Web site. 

The major problem with Red Hat 9.0 is its slightly out-of-date version of MySQL. The 4.x release, which adds Union que- ries and full support for full-text indexes, is now considered the production ver- sion. But Red Hat still inexplicably pack- ages the older 3.2x version of MySQL. 

Upgrading to the 4.x series is not as easy as installing Webmin and, if you have an existing installation of MySQL on your machine, it can cause problems. There is excellent documentation on the MySQL Web site (www.mysql.com) that covers everything you'll need to know to install the latest version of MySQL. 

## Conclusion 

Red Hat 9.0 ranks as the single most painless installation I have ever seen in my 20 years of computing. It won't cost you a cent to download, but offers the power and features of systems costing tens of thousands of dollars. 

Contact Aron Pilhofer by e-mail at apilhofer@publicintegrity.org. 



CALL FOR ENTRIES 2003 AWARDS 

The annual contest of Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc. 

CATEGORIES 

Newspaper 

Television 

Online 

Other Media: Magazine/Speciality Publication Book Radio 

Special Categories: Renner (crime reporting) FOI Student 

Postmark DEADLINE January 12, 2004 

The contest recognizes the best investigative reporting in print, broadcast and online media, and helps identify techniques and resources used by entrants. 

For entry forms and detailed information, visit our Web site at www.ire.org/contest 

September October 2003


19


IRE 573.884.7711 

Pulse continued from page 1 

assisted reporting specialist at the newspaper, and I sifted through state and federal databases to identify who was still harming the sound and checked whether regulators ad- equately protected the public and en- vironment. The results were surprising. 

When it comes to measuring water pollution, the sediments tell the story. We found data from plugs of mud that were sampled and analyzed to look at historic pollution trends. Changes in the pollution levels nicely followed the growth of Seattle, the shift from coal burning to electricity and even testing at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation in eastern Washington. 

We looked also at current sampling data, which was collected by numer- ous agencies, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra- tion (NOAA), U.S. Geological Survey, the Army Corps of Engineers and state ecology and wildlife agencies. Prima- rily, we worked with NOAA and state Ecology Department data, identified in scientific papers and provided to us by the authors for free upon request, or found online in association with re- search conferences. 

Then the challenge was making parts per million meaningful. We compared the readings to sediment cleanup stan- dards for Superfund and state pro- grams (http://epa.gov/waterscience/cs and www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/tcp/ smu/sediment.html). The standards helped us distinguish between severe pollution and relatively benign contami- nation. Then we checked out some risk information. NOAA has a Web site in- cluding a chart showing the risk posed by pollutants at different concentrations for fresh and salt water at http:// response.restoration.noaa.gov/cpr/ sediment/sediment.html. 

We didn't find much that was shock- ing, but were able to calculate the num- 

ber of square miles of contamination in the sound. We found that the pollu- tion was getting better overall and that the main backsliding came from pollu- tion associated with cars, not industry. 

These results led us in search of the pollution sources - where did this stuff come from, and was it still pouring in? We used databases of cleanup sites to identify old polluters and places where contaminants could be leaching from tainted sediment. Some of those locations had been placed under the federal Superfund program, others un- der state regulation. The U.S. Environ- mental Protection Agency has a searchable site for some federal clean- ups (www.epa.gov/superfund/sites/npl/ locate.htm), but that didn't provide the data we needed for our analysis. 

For that, we went again to the Ecology Department. We downloaded from its Web site an Excel file called the Con- firmed and Suspected Contaminated Sites (CSCS) Report. It had loads of information including what the pollut- ant was; if it was in the land, air or wa- ter; the progress of the cleanup and, roughly, how long the contamination had been known about. 

While still in Excel, we sorted out the counties in the Puget Sound water- shed. Then we imported the spread- sheet into Access, creating a new table so we could run queries select- ing the chemicals of greatest concern - PCBs, heavy metals, dioxins, poly- cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and phenols - then tallied how many sites were poisoned with these most worrisome chemicals and where they were in the cleanup process. A query showed that cleanup had not started at more than 200 of 1,400 sites. We could also look at the sources of some long-banned chemicals, par- ticularly PCBs. 

For current contamination sources, we looked to the federal National Pollut- ant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, which regulates water pollution released from industrial and municipal facilities, and storm wa- 

ter pollution from local governments, construction sites, industry and sand and gravel operations. 

The amount of pollution released is supposed to get ratcheted down with each five-year permit renewal to achieve the Clean Water Act's goal of eliminating discharge into waterways. When renewals are delayed we found some decades-old permits - pollution remains high. 

The Ecology Department provided the data at no charge, though Olsen did yeoman's work getting it in a for- mat that we could use - first dealing with an Oracle file in a version we couldn't use, then just getting it as a text file that she turned into an Ac- cess table. From that, we pulled out the locations for rivers and streams in the sound's watershed, as well as those that dumped directly into it. That left us with more than 170,000 records tracking every release from 1999 to mid-2002, including the pol- lution limits, violations and cause of the violations. The data also had lati- tude and longitude coordinates, so we could plot the sites in ArcView 3.x to show how widespread the pollut- ers were and that even upland loca- tions miles from the sound could hurt its health. We also mapped the most frequent violators, 

The data was fraught with errors, mostly from the incorrect use of codes that indicate why violations occurred, giving us numerous false violations. We ended up compiling our list of top of- fenders and passing it over to the Ecol- ogy Department to check against pa- per records. We also discovered pily before publication - that the de- partment tracked the industrial sites separately and had failed to include them in our request, basically telling us they'd forgotten it. 

It turned out that the biggest water quality violators were not industrial fa- cilities, but public sewage treatment plants. In fact, by counting in Access the number of permit violations per fa- cility, we found that a pristine park that 

20


September
October 2003


Uplink


is a popular tourist destination was operating an outdated sewage plant, placing it among the top violators. By simply using the "find" function, we then searched an Excel file of penalties the Ecology Department had levied in re- cent years and discovered that the de- partment went easy on the government entities that were top violators. 

One shortcoming we found with the permits data was that pollution was tracked by concentration, not total amount, so it was impossible to tally the volume of pollutants released. EPA's Toxic Release Inventory totaled pollution annually by pound, but the data includes only select categories of industrial polluters and an abbreviated list of chemicals that changes over time. Despite these shortcomings, we created a graphic showing the number of pounds of pollutants released by the largest facilities, noting that even with this limited data, more than 1 million pounds of chemicals was dumped into the sound annually. 

Storm water discharge, perhaps the greatest water pollution threat, is one of the trickiest to measure. Most NPDES storm water permits lack dis- charge limits or pollution monitoring requirements. Some cities and coun- ties will conduct their own tests, though the most comprehensive study we could find was a 1995 re- port from a local public utility that listed what was in the water and whether it violated federal standards. 

We also checked for damaged water- ways that have Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) restrictions limiting the pollutants legally dumped into them. These so-called 303(d) list waterways can help illustrate long-term effects of pollution. The EPA maintains a list of the sites (www.epa.gov/OWOW/tmdl), but it would be worth checking with them or the state agency managing the list to make sure the online version is up to date. 

After figuring out what we could about pollution in the environment and where it was coming from, we wanted to know 

what that meant for the critters soak- ing in it, plus the people eating the lo- cal seafood. We also were curious about the aquatic life population numbers. 

We tracked down data collected by our state Fish and Wildlife Depart- ment on mercury and PCB contami- nation from around the sound for a variety of fish. This data was provided after many phone calls and with much trepidation. We promised to discuss how we were using the numbers, making sure we were comparing measurements appropriately, and fi- nally they sent us an Excel file with more than 100 records. The data in- cluded latitude and longitude coor- dinates, so we mapped the locations where samples were collected. 

As we expected, the map showed that fish from industrial areas were more contaminated than their country counterparts. But we found a sur- prise: not only did the long-lived, bot- tom-feeding fish in industrial areas show higher levels of contamination - the salmon did too. 

Finally, after looking at pollution in the sediment and in the fish, we wanted to know how sea life fared in numbers. Using state catch figures, we plotted tons of fish caught over recent decades using Excel. We created fever charts that showed, in species after species, populations in deep decline. 

Putting all of these measures to- gether we were able to present a holistic view of a water body in a pre- carious position, one whose fish population was edging to the point of no return unless changes were made quickly to nurse the sound back to health. Since the series ran, the gov- ernor has pledged to spend $100,000 on orca recovery efforts, Ecology Department officials have proposed stronger water quality and shoreline development regulations, and fund- ing has been secured for a rescue tug to protect against shipwrecks. 

Contact Lisa Stiffler by e-mail at lisastiffler@seattlepi.com. 

# Computer-Assisted Reporting Boot Camps 

These unique seminars give journalists a jumpstart in computer-assisted reporting techniques. Participants come to Columbia, Mo., where they are trained in how to acquire electronic information, use spreadsheets and databases to analyze the information and to translate that information into high-impact stories. The National Institute of Computer- Assisted Reporting provides follow-up help when participants return to their news organizations. 

Jan. 4-9, 2004 March 21-26, 2004 May 16-21, 2004 Aug. 1-6, 2004 

## What participants have said about IRE and NICAR training: 

"The workshop and the conference have convinced me that the investigative reporting approach and techniques can be easily applied to beat reporting and daily journalism." Afi-Odelia Scruggs, Professor of Journalism at Ohio Wesleyan University 

"The training and workshops are first-rate, to be sure. Our newspaper, and hence our city, is the better for it in innumerable ways, both great and small." Willy Stern, Nashville Scene 

"Thanks for your inspiration and guidance. I'm hooked on data!" - Glenn Henderson, The Palm Beach Post 

More information is available at www.ire.org/training 

September October 2003


21


# Children continued from page 1 

somehow shine light on children in Cleveland and allow us to compare the condition of their lives to that of kids elsewhere. 

We spent the next few months search- ing for data. We wanted to touch on all the important areas: health, education, crime, housing. We wanted figures that could be compiled on a city-by-city ba- sis. And for big cities, we wanted to be able to examine what was going on in individual neighborhoods. 

Along the way, we found a couple of new wrinkles to this much-written story. (Much of our effort went into reporting on environmental health issues, such as identifying the 1.5 million young- sters statewide who either live next door to a toxic waste site or in poor housing). We also came up with some creative uses of Census 2000 data. 

The result was a five-day series, "Chil- dren Left Behind," published in late July that showed how kids in Cleveland are so much worse off than those in other places in Ohio or in comparable big cit- ies across the country. 

We found that Cleveland students are twice as likely to drop out of high school than those in Philadelphia or Milwau- kee. A larger share of our kids lives in poverty, are lead poisoned and become teenage parents. 

We also found that nearly half of Cleveland's children are living in risky housing, meaning that they are at risk for injuries, lead poisoning, and potential asthma triggers like cockroaches and rats. 

"We've got Third World numbers for kids," one community leader told us. And our data analysis showed he was right. 

By geocoding the addresses in five years of Ohio death records ob- tained from the Ohio Health Depart- ment with ArcView 3.3, we identified some city neighborhoods where in- 

fants are dying in rates that rival Guatemala, Guyana and Romania. 

This wasn't tricky, really. We used the age field in the death records to find babies less than 1 year old. Then we used ArcView's StreetMap geocoding extension to create a point map by matching the home ad- dresses in the death records against a streets map. Later we used ArcView to attach a Census tract number to each death record, so that we could then compile infant deaths by neighborhood. 

Using Ohio's birth records, which show the mother's age and baby's weight and gestational age, we were able to determine that premature and low- birth weight babies born to teenage mothers cost state taxpayers and hos- pitals an estimated $161 million from 1997 through 2001, the latest year for which we had records. 

All told, we analyzed more than a million records 

And, not surprisingly, these crummy conditions hit poor and minority chil- dren much harder than others. For ex- ample, our analysis of five years of death records revealed that black chil- dren accounted for 25 percent of all child deaths, but only 14 percent of the child population. Among infants in Cuyahoga and Hamilton counties, Cleveland and Cincinnati, respectively, African-American babies comprised more than half of all deaths, yet less than one-quarter of all infants. 

We found the death data easy to work with. We paid $100 for a year's worth of records, and the state provided them on CD in dBASE files. The five files held roughly a half-million death 

records. We used Visual FoxPro for the heavy number crunching. 



Ultimately, we settled on eight indica- tors: the percent of children in poverty (Census 2000), the percent of children with a single parent (Census 2000), the rate of premature babies per 1,000 births (Ohio Health Department), the birth rate per 1,000 teenage girls (Ohio Health Department), the infant mortal- ity rate (Ohio Health Department), the number of children sent to state de- tention centers (Ohio Department of Youth Services), the percent of chil- dren living next to a toxic waste site (Ohio Environmental Protection Agency), the percent of children liv- ing in risky housing (Census 2000), and the percent of children with a dis- ability (Census 2000). 

Aside from the birth and death records, all of the data was free. And the agen- cies seemed happy to give it to us. 

All told, we analyzed more than a mil- lion records gathered from Ohio agencies, other states and the 2000 Census to produce our indicators and rank our cities. 

To make comparisons between cities fair, we used Census data to group places into eight categories based on population, median household income and the percent of residents living in urban, rural or suburban setting. 

Then we used a simple rank order ap- proach to rank cities within each cat- egory. Here's how we did it: We ranked all of the cities in each category eight different times, once for each indica- tor. We summed the ranks for each city, divided by eight, and re-ranked the cit- ies on the final number. 

We gave each indicator equal weight. But we didn't include an indicator if it was based on fewer than 10 incidents. For example, we excluded infant mor- tality rates that were based on fewer than 10 deaths. 

There were more than 1,600 places in our rankings. 

22


September October 2003


Uplink


The most controversial part of our analysis was our estimate of kids who lived in risky housing. (To be upfront with readers, we published the figures for all eight indicators for all 210 cities and towns in our circulation area). 

We created a risky-housing index us- ing four Census figures on the block level. They were the percent of chil- dren in poverty, the percent of homes that were built before 1970, the per- cent of residents who are renters, and a ratio of the value of homes in the block group compared to the average value in the city on the whole. 

Each of the four parts of the equa- tion was expressed as a percentage. We then averaged the percentages and applied this figure against the number of children living in the block group to get our estimate of those liv- ing in risky housing. 

The idea was that low-income children in neighborhoods with older homes, a high number of renters and homes valued at substantially less than the rest of the city were likely to be living in risky housing. Our firsthand inspec- tions in many neighborhoods ap- peared to back this up. 

Still, that didn't slow the angry calls, especially from the older, so-called "inner ring" suburbs where we indi- cated that in some of them up to one- third of the children were put at risk by their homes. 

Many callers felt this was a misuse of Census data, but I'll let you be the judge. You can find the stories, graphics and photographs at www.cleveland.com/children. 

You might also want to check out the Annie E. Casey Foundation's ongoing "Kids Count" project (www.aecf.org/ kidscount), which examines the well being of children in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. 

Contact Dave Davis by e-mail at ddavis@plaind.com 

# IRE and NICAR Services 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc. is a grassroots nonprofit organi- zation dedicated to improving the qual- ity of investigative reporting within the field of journalism. IRE was formed in 1975 with the intent of creating a net- working tool and a forum in which jour- nalists from across the country could raise questions and exchange ideas. IRE provides educational services to reporters, editors and others interested in investigative reporting and works to maintain high professional standards. 

## Programs and Services 

IRE Resource Center: A rich reserve of print and broadcast stories, tipsheets and guides to help you start and complete the best work of your career. This unique library is the start- ing point of any piece you're working on. You can search through abstracts of more than 19,000 investigative re- porting stories through our Web site. Contact: Carolyn Edds, carolyn@ire.org, 573-882-3364 

Database Library: Administered by IRE and the National Institute for Com- puter-Assisted Reporting. The library has copies of many government data- bases, and makes them available to news organizations at or below actual cost. Analysis services are available on these databases, as is help in deci- phering records you obtain yourself. Contact: Jeff Porter, jeff@ire.org, 573-882-1982 

Campaign Finance Information Center: Administered by IRE and the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Re- porting. It's dedicated to helping jour- nalists uncover the campaign money trail. State campaign finance data is collected from across the nation, cleaned and made available to jour- nalists. A search engine allows report- ers to track political cash flow across sev- eral states in federal and state races. Contact: Brant Houston, brant@ire.org, 573-882-2042 

On-the-Road Training: As a top pro- moter of journalism education, IRE of- fers loads of training opportunities throughout the year. Possibilities range from national conferences and regional 

workshops to weeklong boot camps and on-site newsroom training. Costs are on a sliding scale and fellowships are available to many of the events. Contact: Brant Houston, brant@nicar.org, 573-882-2042 

## Publications 

The IRE Journal. Published six times a year. Contains journalist profiles, how- to stories, reviews, investigative ideas and backgrounding tips. The Journal also provides members with the latest news on upcoming events and training opportunities from IRE and NICAR. Contact: Len Bruzzese, len@ire.org, 573-882-2042 

Uplink: Bimonthly newsletter by IRE and NICAR on computer-assisted re- porting. Often, Uplink stories are writ- ten after reporters have had particular success using data to investigate sto- ries. The columns include valuable in- formation on advanced database tech- niques as well as success stories writ- ten by newly trained CAR reporters. Contact: David Herzog, dherzog@nicar.org, 573-882-2127 

Reporter.org: A collection of Web- based resources for journalists, jour- nalism educators and others. Dis- counted Web hosting and services such as mailing list management and site development are provided to other nonprofit journalism organizations. Contact: Ted Peterson, ted@nicar.org, 573-884-7321 

For information on: Advertising: Pia Christensen, pia@ire.org, 573-884-2175 

Membership and subscriptions: John Green, jgreen@ire.org, 573-882-2772 

Conferences and Boot Camps: Ev Ruch-Graham. ev@ire.org, 573-882-8969 

Listservs: Ted Peterson, ted@nicar.org, 573-884-7321 

Mailing Address: IRE, 138 Neff Annex, Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, MO 65211 

September October 2003


23


Uplink


# Uplink Info 

A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

brant@ire.org Brant Houston Editor 

dherzog@nicar.org David Herzog Managing Editor 

jeff@nicar.org Jeff Porter Asst. Managing Editor 

Lisa Triefenbach Art Director 

Pia Christensen Copy Editor 

Holly Hacker Jaimi Dowdell Contributing Editors 

School of Journalism. Editors Inc. and the Missouri of Investigative Reporters and NICAR is a joint program 

data analysis. training programs, tipsheets and government databases, supplying journalists with NICAR services include 

573-884-7711 Editorial 

573-882-2772 Subscriptions 

len@ire.org Len Bruzzese Director of Publications 

pia@ire.org Pia Christensen Advertising Coordinator 

jgreen@ire.org John Green Subscription Administrator 

IRE members $40, nonmembers $60 Subscriptions 

Columbia, MO 65211 Missouri School of Journalism IRE-NICAR, 138 Neff Annex Uplink Address: 

address changes to IRE-NICAR. Postmaster: Please send 

Kouryn ei dirtyd DATE LITT JO aw 

S'N alvd OW 68 ON 

"oul pue Hon 881 to OW 