July
August 2003
 Volume 15. Number 4

Published bimonthly by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
 www.nicar.org


## TAXES Finding the biggest deadbeats 

By Mark Greenblatt WBBH-Fort Myers/Naples, Fla. 

Our project began with a search for the top 10 tax delinquents in Charlotte County. With govern- ment budgets facing some of their tightest years in state his- tory, my television station wanted to know who wasn't pay- ing their fair share of property taxes in southwest Florida. By the end of the reporting, we dis- covered a much more important story that could potentially help collect millions of dollars in lost revenue for Charlotte County. 

I began by contacting the Char- lotte County tax collector and requesting a complete data- base of all tax certificates is- sued to people who hadn't paid their real property taxes in the last seven years. We wanted to know who the delinquents were and how much they owed in taxes and penalties. 

Within a week of the initial re- quest, I received a comprehen- sive set of "deadbeat data" from the tax collector on CD-ROM. 

SPOTLIGHT: JOBS, PAY & PERKS 

# Simple sorts reveal cops' overtime jackpot 

continued on page 18 

By Mark Pazniokas, The Hartford Courant 

Hartford police complained for years about being underpaid. Starting pay is just $34,554 - lower than in many nearby suburbs. Patrol officers' base pay tops out after five years at $56,095. 

So it was startling news when The Hartford Courant reported that the median income for the city's police of- ficers actually was $75,000 last year, with 20 percent of the force's 377 of- 

SPOTLIGHT: FOR MORE ON JOBS, PAY & PERKS SEE: 



Tallying cost of unused sick time in New Jersey, p. 4 
Analysis finds highest paid Maryland state workers, p. 8 
Finding workers added to Ohio state payroll, p. 9 
Key databases useful in covering public employees compensation,p 
The July/August 2003 issue of The IRE Journal details several related stories. 

continued on page 17 

## FIRST VENTURE Learning lessons while tracing pol's spending 

By Todd McAdam, Press & Sun-Bulletin (Binghamton, NY) 

As I walked out of a prominent state senator's office following an interview, he and his spokeswoman handed me a plastic bag. In it were two bars of high-quality chocolate imprinted with his campaign logo, a coffee mug with the same design, a bottle of a spice rub suitable for beef, chicken or fish, and a bottle of steak sauce regularly sold at the politician's premier fundraiser. 

"You know," I told the spokeswoman, 

a longtime source, "I can take this only if I do a story on it someday." 

She laughed. 

Six months later, I sat at my desk and stared at the mug. It was gathering dust on a corner of my desk. I had just returned home from an IRE and NICAR Boot Camp and was eager to prove that I don't believe in junkets - and wouldn't go to Columbia, Mo., for one even if I did. 

continued on page 20


188 Détababo 573.884.7711 

Bits & Bytes 



## Historical spending data 

The IRE and NICAR Database Library has compiled archived data to provide journalists with the most thorough tools for covering federal spending. This historical data allows jour- nalists the unique opportunity to go back in time and track federal spending in their com- munities across decades. Journalists can use the data to show how different presiden- tial administrations, economic conditions and pivotal events affected spending. 

The IRE and NICAR Database Library now has Federal Con- tracts data covering fiscal years 1979-2002 The data- base lists almost all federal contracts worth more than $25,000 and includes the amount, name and location of the company, the agency, the type of work and where the work was performed. 

The Database Library has also added Federal Assistance Award Data System (FAADS) covering fiscal years 1983- 2002. Journalists can use the FAADS data to determine what federal money has been obligated to individuals, state and local governments, insti- tutions of higher education, profit organizations, nonprofit agencies and others. 

For more details on these datasets, including prices and ordering information, go to www.ire.org/datalibrary/ databases or contact the IRE and NICAR Database Library at 573-884-7711. 

# IRE's chief trainer moves on 

By David Herzog, University of Missouri and NICAR 

Ron Nixon, who's trained thousands of journalists across the globe in computer-assisted reporting for IRE and NICAR, is headed back to the newsroom. 

After two and a half years on the road, Ron is set to go home to Minneapolis, where he will become the computer- assisted reporting editor on the Star Tri- bune projects team in early September. 

As the training director for IRE and NICAR, Ron logged countless miles to help print and broadcast journalists do their jobs better and earned their praise. He's trained in newsrooms, na- tional journalism association events and at events conducted by IRE and NICAR. 

Center (www.campaignfinance.org) and later moved into the top training post. Before joining IRE and NICAR, Ron was an investigative reporter for The Roanoke (Va.) Times with years of experience working with local, state and federal campaign finance data. 

continued on page 4 

In his spare time at home, Ron kept his skills sharp by performing database and geographic information system analy- sis for clients of the IRE and NICAR database library. 

Ron joined IRE and NICAR as the direc- tor of the Campaign Finance Information 

Ron's last official day with IRE and NICAR is Aug. 29. Drop him a note at ron@ire.org and join us in wishing him well as he returns to newspaper jour- nalism. 

Contact David Herzog-by e-mail at dherzog@nicar.org. 

## Hands-on CAR training upcoming 

IRE and NICAR has numerous training opportunities in the coming months for journalists who want to learn computer-assisted reporting. For a complete list of training events visit www.ire.org/training/otr.html. 

Here are some of the highlights: 

Journalists can get an overview of computer-assisted reporting at Better Watchdog Workshops of- fered by IRE and the Society for Professional Journalists. Upcoming workshops include Sept. 11 in Tampa, Fla., Oct. 4-5 in Eugene, Ore., 

and Oct. 25 in State College, Pa. 

There are four CAR Boot Camps in Columbia, Mo., next year for jour- nalists who want hands-on training in how to use spreadsheets and database managers to analyze data for high-impact stories. The ses- sions are Jan. 4-9, March 21-26, May 16-21 and Aug. 1-6. 

Also, mark your calendar for the annual CAR conference, March 12- 14 in Cincinnati. The conference promises to be great for tips, story ideas and hands-on training. 

2


July August 2003


Uplink


IRE AWARDS 

# CAR gives contest winners boost 

By Rachel Schaff, University of Missouri 

The May/June issue of Uplink high- lighted the television, special cat- egories and other media winners and finalists of IRE's annual in- vestigative reporting contest that used computer-assisted reporting. Here we feature the newspaper, FOI and Tom Renner award winners and finalists that used CAR. 

## Local circulation weeklies Finalist: 

Atlanta Business Chronicle: "North- ern Arc: Road to Riches" by Sarah Rubenstein and Walter Woods. Rubenstein and Woods exposed how the planned construction of a new highway north of Atlanta, called the Northern Arc, would benefit govern- ment officials who owned property along the proposed road. The report- ers based their investigation on land parcel maps and corresponding Microsoft Excel spreadsheets for the counties through which the Northern Arc would pass. Rubenstein and Woods were named journalists of the year by the Atlanta Press Club and the story won Best Scoop from At- lanta Magazine. (Story No. 19576 in the IRE Resource Center) 

## Small newspapers 

(Circulation less than 100,000) 

## Finalists: 

Charleston (W.Va.) Gazette: "The Long Haul/Broken Promises" by Eric Eyre and Scott Finn. This investiga- tion examined the effects of school consolidation in West Virginia, includ- ing the increased amount of time stu- dents had to spend traveling to and from school. Eyre and Finn requested bus logs under FOIA for 35 counties. With the information, they built a spreadsheet of 1,569 bus runs, form- ing the foundation for the story. The series won the Education Writers Association's Fred M. Hechinger 

Grand Prize for Distinguished Educa- tion Reporting. See "Measuring long bus rides for rural children" in the September/October 2002 Uplink for a full account of the data analysis. (Story No. 19601) 

Tri-City Herald (Pasco, Wash.): "Bit- ter Harvest" by Mike Lee. This story investigated a series of deaths, envi- ronmental damage and accidents that were all traced back to one Columbia Basin farm, the largest organic farm in Washington state. Lee showed how the farm's owners ignored environ- mental regulations, and he exposed the government's failure to take any decisive action. Lee used spread- sheets to track story threads and piece together information from a dozen agencies. The story - which relied on more than 20 public docu- ment requests from state and federal agencies - won in the investigative reporting category in Sigma Delta Chi's competition for newspapers with a circulation under 100,000 and first place for agriculture/business report- ing in the Inland Northwest SPJ com- petition. (Story No. 19608) 

## Medium newspapers 

(100,000-250,000 circulation) Certificate: 

The Fresno Bee: "Last Gasp" by Russell Clemings, Barbara Anderson and Mark Grossi. This special report traced how California's San Joaquin Valley air basin became one of America's most polluted. The report- ers used FOI requests to acquire in- formation from many sources, includ- ing the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. They then used Access, Ex- cel and FoxPro to compare current lev- els of pollution with historical estimates and eventually to understand the grow- ing toxicity of the basin. "Last Gasp" also won first place in the Associated 

Press News Executives Council's con- test for public service reporting; first place in the Best of the West explana- tory reporting category; the Meade Clean Air Prize; the Coalition for Clean Air's Corporate Clean Air Leadership Award; and the EPA's Environmental Achievement Award. See the Septem- ber/October 2003 issue of The IRE Journal for details of their investigation. (Story No. 19677) 

## Finalists: 

The Birmingham News: "The Black Belt: Alabama's Third World" by John Archibald, Jeff Hansen, Carla Crowder, Thomas Spencer and Marie Jones. This piece focused on a small region of Alabama called the "Black Belt." People in this region, mostly poverty-stricken African-Americans, live in conditions much worse than those in the rest of the state. The re- porters relied on databases of all land records for 10 Alabama counties as well as census records, mortality and birth records, data from the Alabama Department of Public Health, prop- erty tax records, and other state da- tabases. The authors built many of their own databases using Excel and Access. This series also won awards from the Alabama Associated Press Managing Editors, Alabama Press Association and the Medical Associa- tion of Alabama. (Story No. 19724) 

Dayton Daily News: "Deadly Conse- quences, Ohio's Broken Mental Re- tardation System" by Tom Beyerlein and Steve Bennish. The Dayton Daily News identified 30 cases of neglect within Ohio's mental retardation sys- tem by matching death cases against addresses of group homes for the mentally retarded. The reporters used Excel and Access to analyze 400,000 death records and develop their own database of deaths in group homes. (Story No. 19107) 

The Virginian-Pilot: "Operating Be- hind Closed Doors" by Liz Szabo. This story illustrates the failures of Virginia's system for protecting pa- tients from dangerous doctors by highlighting the last decade in the 

continued on page 22


July . August 2003


3


Bits & Bytes continued from page 2 



## Data analysis 

The IRE and NICAR Database Library recently conducted an environmental data analysis for a story that aired on WMAQ- Chicago in May. The analysis identified areas with a large number of polluters under state remediation programs. Using ArcView, the Database Library mapped polluters by ZIP code, by latitude and longitude and, using the Spatial Analyst exten- sion, found the neighborhoods with the highest concentrations of polluters and pollutants. To read the story, go to www.nbc5.com/news/2203768/ detail.html. For more informa- tion on how IRE and NICAR can help your news organization conduct data analysis, contact the Database Library at 573- 884-7711. 

## Training 

Although no IRE and NICAR Boot Camps remain this year, journalists will have many op- portunities in 2004 to take ad- vantage of the specialty train- ing that these high-impact CAR seminars offer. Dates for the 2004 Boot Camps in Columbia, Mo., are Jan. 4-9, March 21-26, May 16-21 and Aug. 1-6. 

SPOTLIGHT: JOBS, PAY & PERKS 

For more details about the Boot Camps, including fellowship and registration information and a typical daily training schedule, go to www.ire.org/training/ bootcamps.html. For information on other training opportunities available from IRE and NICAR, go to www.ire.org/training. 

# Tallying the bill for unused sick time By Robert Gebeloff, The Star-Ledger 

When we use computer-assisted re- porting for our government coverage, salary data is often at the top of our list. 

We obtain government payrolls and rank them. We compare median sala- ries of teachers among our school dis- tricts. When a government worker gets suspended for official misconduct, we don't report just that. We write that the worker was suspended from a $90,000-a-year job. 

But salary data is just the tip of the ice- berg in reporting on government work- ers and their benefits. There's police overtime, government-issue cell phones and credit cards. 

And in New Jersey there's the mat- ter of sick and vacation time. Seem- ingly innocuous, except, as we found, that local government agencies are now on the hook for nearly $1.5 bil- lion to reimburse employees who fail to use their allotted time. 

Ever since the Great Depression, civil servants in New Jersey have essen- tially been guaranteed 15 paid sick days a year. Over time, government agencies began allowing workers to carry unused days over into sick day banks, a practice later codified in union contracts. 

It's a progressive benefit intended to protect workers who suffer prolonged illness. But in the modern era, it has become a bonanza for retirees. As pub- lic employee unions gained strength in the 1970s, they managed to negotiate mandatory payouts for unused sick and vacation time. 

In almost all cases the payouts are made to retirees at their final pay rate, not the salary at the time the days were banked. 

The Star-Ledger was certainly not the first paper to notice how common it had become for a police chief or schools superintendent to collect a six-figure payout - on top of a generous pension - just for retiring. 

In fact, when | was with a regional pa- per in New Jersey a few years ago, we did a pretty good CAR story that looked at the potential cost of this system. 

But nobody had ever been able to re- port precisely what the statewide im- pact was, and thus we had a mission. 

When it came to gathering data, we had one thing going for us. The state had recently enacted new regulations that required municipalities to annually calculate the value of "compensated absences." 

We found that school districts had been making the calculations for years and listed the amount as a long-term liabil- ity on their annual audits. 

That was the good news. The bad news was that none of this information was available electronically. We wanted a number for 1,177 different agencies throughout the state and it was all on paper. We discovered that all of the paper ends up in one place: Trenton. 

So with a research assistant and laptop in tow, I made a series of visits to the state capital. It took us about six days to pull the 1,177 documents out of fil- ing cabinets one by one, find the sick time number on each and enter them into a spreadsheet. 

Once we had the numbers it was easy to add it all up and come up with the $1.5 billion total. 

More challenging was coming up with 

4


July August 2003


Uplink 

a method for compiling town-by-town statistics. In addition to the state's 566 municipalities, we had to account for school districts and county agencies that collected taxes across town borders. 

Since we wanted to measure the im- pact on the basis of property taxes, we used property tax data to help us divvy up the burden. 

For example, employees of the West Essex Regional district had $400,000 in the sick-time bank. Roseland is a town served by the district, and about one quarter of the district's tax base is located in Roseland. Therefore, we assigned one quarter of the obliga- tion to pay West Essex retirees to Roseland residents. 

We did the same with the obligation to county employees so at the end of the process, we had one figure for each town that incorporated what was owed to municipal workers, school employ- ees and county employees. 

After we had a single number for each town, we wanted to add context. 

Obviously, the biggest cities would have the most employees - and likely the highest total obligation. 

Yet these towns would also be able to spread their obligation among a larger base of taxpayers. So we needed to come up with a way of quantifying the number. We came up with two. 

First, we did a simple per-capita cal- culation. Then we plugged the number into the town's property tax formula and expressed it in terms of the average homeowner. 

We used both in the story. Per capita, we decided, was an easy-to-under- stand ratio that generally put the total obligation into context. The average homeowner cost, meanwhile, was a more precise measure that told read- ers "This is exactly what it's going to cost you in coming years." 

called Harrison, the average home- owner was on the hook for nearly $3,100. Overall, the debt was $251 per person in the state's 30 cities, but only $152 per person in the suburbs. 

We found that in a tiny urban enclave 

We also found that individual golden parachutes were being proffered all over the state. In one of the audits we pulled, for a tiny rural community called Stillwater, there was a footnote from the auditor explaining that the town's obligation was unclear, pend- ing resolution of a conflict with a soon-to-retire police chief. 

Upon closer examination, we found a community where the police force could be counted on one hand, the number of annual crimes on two, and the police chief was walking away with a severance package of $117,587 for sick and vacation time he didn't use. 

After the story ran, a reader tipped us off to another case that lead to a fol- low-up: The police chief in Jersey City had recently been granted a compen- sation package that provided him with an instant bank of 150 sick days-days he could cash in upon retirement. 

That wasn't necessarily unusual, ex- cept that the chief had already retired once from the force, as a lieutenant, and cashed in a six-figure payout. Now he was in line to get a second helping of taxpayer generosity. 

There were, of course, arguments in- cluded in these stories for why such payouts are justified. Unions told us that because these benefits are often negotiated for their rank and file, it means the unions had to give up some- thing else to get such a deal. 

Still, the point of our stories was not to pass judgment on the system. Rather, our goal was to tell readers the real cost of such a system - a figure that had been unknown until we completed our project. 

Read the story, "Cashing Out," online at www.nj.com/specialprojects. 

# Computer-Assisted Reporting Boot Camps 

Contact Rob Gebeloff by e-mail at rgebeloff@starledger.com. 

These unique seminars give journalists a jumpstart in computer-assisted reporting techniques. Participants come to Columbia, Mo., where they are trained in how to acquire electronic information, use spreadsheets and databases to analyze the information and to translate that information into high-impact stories. The National Institute of Computer- Assisted Reporting provides follow-up help when participants return to their news organizations. 

Jan. 4-9, 2004 March 21-26, 2004 May 16-21, 2004 Aug. 1-6, 2004 

What participants have said about IRE and NICAR training: 

"The workshop and the conference have convinced me that the investigative reporting approach and techniques can be easily applied to beat reporting and daily journalism." Afi-Odelia Scruggs, Professor of Journalism at Ohio Wesleyan University 

"The training and workshops are first-rate, to be sure. Our newspaper, and hence our city, is the better for it in innumerable ways, both great and small." Willy Stern, Nashville Scene 

"Thanks for your inspiration and guidance. I'm hooked on data!" - Glenn Henderson, The Palm Beach Post 

More information is available at www.ire.org/training 

July August 2003


5


visit our Web www.nicar.org 

MAPPING The latest uses of mapping in news reporting. 

## GIS shows close call for Dallas 

By John Kelly, Florida Today 

"How many are dead on the ground?" 

I must have asked that question a dozen or so times the morning of Feb. 1, as my colleagues and I scrambled to find out what hap- pened to the shuttle Columbia in the far reaches of the Texas sky. Watching the televised images of 

giant steel balls, mangled frag- ments of wing and other heavy metal objects strewn across Texas, it seemed obvious the death toll was going to be higher than the seven astronauts. The question was, "How many?" 

The still-dumbfounding answer is zero. NASA got lucky. 

NASA seemed to be ignoring how many people on the ground had been in harm's way. It was a fun- damental public safety issue. We weren't about to ignore it. We could have just thrown together color from Texas with dueling ex- pert quotes for a "what-a-miracle" story. Instead, we wanted to show in a definitive way the very real risk of flying the space shuttle over populated areas. 

We set out to apply the same meth- ods that NASA, the U.S. Air Force and big aerospace contractors use when they try to assess danger to people on the ground during space launches, or when one of their un- manned satellites or rockets even- 

ArcVick

1:3210,511

STATES

Columbia

TOTALPOP/SQU
 0.000000000-10
 10.79-23.78
 23.79-47.30
 47.31-94.03
 94.04-201.0
 201.1-390.2
 300315434
 643.5-972.7
 0728-1363
 1354-1789
 1790-2245

-2741

2747-3257
 3250 3706
 3780 4335
 1336 4972
 4973 5773
 5774 6726
 5727 8745
 8747 57710

Solare


tually plummets back to Earth. 

That turned out to be the right ap- proach for two reasons. 

First, my colleague Todd Halvorson and I piled up a moun- tain of public records showing how carefully the government and aerospace companies make sure that debris from re-entering space- craft and rockets does not strike land, let alone come down on populated areas. By contrast, Halvorson found NASA had never studied the danger to people on the ground during the very risky re- entry of its space shuttles. 

Second, we learned the industry's accepted method for minimizing death and destruction on the ground was to predict the footprint, or area, where the debris would hit, and to do everything possible to control the re-entering space junk so the danger zone would contain few, if any, residents. 

I knew we could use ESRI ArcView mapping software to determine the number of people who were in the path of shuttle parts. Using ArcView we layered the debris footprint over U.S. Census population data and determined that about 216,000 people lived in the largely rural area where most of the debris hit. We also used the shuttle's flight path to show the more grim consequences had the shuttle broken up about a minute earlier. 

In that case, the storm of metal would have hit Dallas' suburbs. About three times as many people and houses would have been in the path of falling wreckage. 

Computer-assisted reporting nerd that I am, I overcomplicated things from the start. 

6


July August 2003


Uplink


GIS and computer mapping tools were being used in the recovery ef- fort. It was clear search teams were recording the precise coordinates of each piece of shuttle found. NASA was making computer maps. 

I went to Stephen F. Austin Univer- sity, which was helping NASA with the mapping. They made available online ArcView shapefiles of the region of Texas where debris was found. I wanted the shapefiles that were the basis of NASA's nifty handouts, showing every piece of debris as a dot on the Texas map. I had the big idea that I was going to calculate how many people lived a set distance from any one of those dots. 

The university asked NASA if they could give me the data. NASA said no. We could FOIA the database, but we did not have time to wait. 

I went back to what the university released online. I found a shapefile of the 20-kilometer buffer zone cal- culated from the centerline of the debris field. The oval was as close as we could get to an "official" de- bris footprint. 

We used a free ArcView 3.x exten- sion called Two-Theme Analyst. I laid the approximated debris foot- print over Texas Census data and then used Two-Theme Analyst to approximate the number of people living within the debris oval. 

We ran the analysis using Census data at the block, block group and tract level. We got three sets of very similar numbers. In the end, we went with block groups be- cause it worked best for the maps we ultimately published in the newspaper. 

We also shifted the footprint northwest along the flight path to 

get "what-if" numbers for a break up over Dallas-Ft. Worth. I then re-created the maps in ArcView 8 and worked closely with graphic artists to convert from ArcView to Adobe Illustrator a set of maps that showed readers the danger- ous consequences of the two scenarios. 

That could not have been done in words alone - and certainly not without the computer analysis. 

We ran a pair of population density maps side by side in the paper that we prepared with ArcView. One showed the real debris field. The other showed the scenario. The simple contrast of population den- sity made a very clear point about NASA's good fortune. Detailed counts of people and homes were given too. 

Our online staff turned the maps into a telling interactive presentation on the Web. See the story at www.floridatoday.com/columbia/ columbiastory2A52178A.htm 

Meanwhile, Halvorson and I also were doing the research and re- porting to frame the issue in the appropriate context. 

We wanted to show how NASA fret- ted in the past about where debris from satellites the size of school buses might hit. Yet for weeks lead- ing up to the publication of our re- port, the agency said it never deemed necessary a study of what might happen with a craft the size of a jetliner. Officials explained the space shuttles were designed to survive re-entry and the chance of a breakup was so remote that study- ing where debris might fall was nei- ther necessary nor practical. 

Our story acknowledged NASA's options are limited. There are only 

so many paths the shuttles can fly to get back from space. But there are options to reach landing strips in Florida and California while sub- stantially reducing the number of population centers beneath the flight path. 

Within a week of the story running, the Columbia Accident Investigation Board said it was looking for con- tractors to study the issue we raised. NASA Associate Administrator Bill Readdy told The Washington Post the agency commissioned a similar study. Neither will say if the studies were initiated before our report or because of it. 

The official government investiga- tion report will ask if public safety should have dictated that NASA try to land Columbia in California that morning instead of flying over so many major population centers from San Francisco to Dallas. NASA is not finished studying its re-entry options for the future, but investigators agree changes to shuttle flight rules are inevitable. 

Contact John Kelly by e-mail at jkelly@flatoday.net 

Would you be willing to share a mapping example with fellow journalists? Send an electronic copy of the map along with details to David Herzog at dherzog@nicar.org 

July . August 2003


7


# SPOTLIGHT: JOBS, PAY & PERKS Combing through data finds top-paid workers 

By Hanah Cho, Los Angeles Times 

The story was supposed to be simple. My task was to update a 1990 analysis by Capital News Ser- vice, a wire service operated by the University of Maryland, examining the highest-paid public employees in the state. The analysis then found that the highest-paid state employ- ees were mostly white and male and came primarily from the academic world, particularly from the public medical schools. 

After preliminary research and inter- views, I determined that state em- ployee salary data in Maryland would come from two sources - the state Office of Personnel Services and Benefits, and the University System of Maryland. (Looking back, after at- tending a NICAR Boot Camp this year, I also should have contacted the state comptroller's office for salary in- formation.) 

I didn't have much time, maybe about two months, to finish the project. So, after pinpointing the right contact per- son at each agency, I immediately filed public information act requests with both agencies. I was very spe- cific in my request and asked for a number of items, including the top 100 highest-paid employees, names, salary, job title, department, gender and race, even though I was unsure I would get the latter because race may be considered private informa- tion. I also asked for the information in electronic form, such as Excel or Access. If I had had more time, would have requested the agencies' complete payroll database so I could perform a more extensive analysis. 

The university system complied with the request within weeks, providing the information in an Excel spread- sheet at no charge. The state Office 

of Personnel Services and Benefits wasn't as efficient or quick. The agency's lawyer argued that my re- quest would essentially create new records, since it would require the agency to reprogram its database something that's not required under the public information act. The lawyer also argued that my request imposed a burden on the agency because it would require extra work. 

The lawyer was strict in her interpreta- tion of the law, while I believed the law left room for negotiation. For example, Maryland's open records act ultimately leaves the choice of format up to the agency. However, the law also urges the agencies to voluntarily agree to the requester's choice of format if it does not require much work or significant cost. I knew my request would take a simple query or two, especially since the university system appeared to have no problems with it. 

I found that the database did not tell the complete story. 



So the lawyer and I wrangled back and forth on the law's intent. As the last straw, I put our position in writing to the lawyer as well as to the Mary- land state attorney. 

Meanwhile, I began analyzing the uni- versity employees' data, a table that included all the requested fields ex- cept race. The seven columns had the last name, first name, salary, title, de- partment, university and gender. The first thing I did was make a copy of 

the database, a point that was drilled into my head by my computer-as- sisted reporting professor, who warned of the dangers of working off the original file. And, although the database was fairly clear, I ran an in- tegrity check to see that there were in fact 100 rows representing the 100 highest-paid employees and whether there were any null fields. 

I found discrepancies in how the names of departments were entered into the database, a quirk that I had to straighten out. I manually typed in the full name of departments by indi- vidually going through the depart- ment fields, because at that point my query skills were pretty basic. 

After that, I imported the file into Ac- cess to run some queries, such as group by department and gender and count. I noticed something immedi- ately. The University of Maryland men's football and basketball team coaches - Ralph Friedgen and Gary Williams, respectively - appeared quite low on the list, even though the media had reported that they make salaries in the millions. So I inquired about the coaches' contracts. But the university's athletic department re- fused to disclose contract details, ar- guing that the university was required only to release state-funded salaries. 

Yet the state law makes it clear that bonuses and performance awards, which Friedgen and Williams most likely received, are considered public. So I filed a public information request even though I wasn't sure I would get the information before my story dead- line. My editors also talked to the law- yer. 

About a month before my deadline, the state finally relented and gave me its top 100 highest-paid state employ- ees in the form I requested. After the databases were combined (which I did manually by copying and pasting, since most of the highest-paid em- ployees came from the university), it was easy to see that the highest-paid employees came mostly from the 

continued on page 16 

8


July August 2003


Uplink


SPOTLIGHT: JOBS, PAY, & PERKS 

# Analysis spots hiring during state crunch 

By Spencer Hunt, The Cincinnati Enquirer 

In the midst of a growing budget crisis, Ohio Gov. Bob Taft outlined his short- term plan to help keep the state's fi- nances in order. 

In addition to cutting back spending at state agencies and raiding the state's "rainy day fund" for $350 million, Taft told reporters he would halt hiring. "With the exception of people critical to health, safety and those involved in revenue-generating activity, we will put all hiring on hold effective immediately," the governor said. 

That statement, an incorrect tip from a good source, and several e-mails from the state's payroll system helped lay the groundwork for an Enquirer analy- sis that showed state departments and agencies hired thousands of workers, including several highly paid administra- tors, while the budget continued to tank. 

The tip was a complaint that Taft's own cabinet leaders ignored his freeze and hired new people "left and right." It turned out that the tip was wrong, but that rumor had a kernel of truth. 

A few months after he announced the freeze, Taft lifted it. That was on July 1, 2002, the beginning of the state's new fiscal year. 

There was still a story to write when a cursory glance at state payroll data in an Excel spreadsheet revealed more than 5,000 people had been hired or promoted since July 

These hires were made while dwin- dling income and sales tax revenue led Taft to cut spending again. This time he eliminated $140 million that would have gone to schools and uni- versities. He'd also recently an- nounced his plans to raise more than $3.1 billion in new taxes. 

The story, published March 30, showed 3,859 people had been hired or promoted to new jobs since July 1. Nearly 1,000 of those people were paid for work not directly linked to health care, public safety or highway maintenance at a taxpayer cost of up to $39 million a year. 

The analysis was done in Excel, using data obtained under the state public records act from the Ohio Department of Administrative Services. This agency handles the payroll for all non-univer- sity state employees. 

Getting data was not a problem. Get- ting the best, most useful data was. The data arrived by e-mail in delimited text at no cost, usually within a day of a request. The spreadsheet had about 5,000 rows, one line per person. 

The first spreadsheet showed the names, agencies, hiring dates and hourly pay rates. I eventually got a spreadsheet that included a more de- tailed job description, instead of a code, and columns showing if the person hired was still employed. 

I sorted the data by job description, name and hiring date to identify people and take out those who weren't in- cluded in the analysis. For instance, there were hundreds of college interns and temporary state fair workers who had to be cut out because they worked for only a matter of weeks. 

There were people who had been hired under a federal program that supplied all the money. These hires would have occurred regardless of the freeze. Since the payroll records didn't identify which jobs were paid by federal funds, had to do some additional reporting by calling agencies that had hired a signifi- cant number of new employees. 

In several cases in which more than 20 people had been hired during the same month with the same job descrip- tion, it turned out that the hiring was done with funds from a new grant or federal program. Additional reporting with officials in other agencies turned up even more federally paid employees 

At the end of this process, 3,859 em- ployees remained. Because state agency officials argued without excep- tion that every hire would have been made under the freeze, my editors and I had to come up with our own defini- tion of an essential employee. We con- sidered anyone directly involved in making sure others were healthy and safe to be essential. We included prison guards, highway patrol cadets, cooks, hospital workers, mental health work- ers, workers at state institutions for the mentally retarded, nurses, doctors and psychiatrists. Psychiatrists were a tough call because almost every one was paid more than $100,000 a year. We also included highway mainte- nance workers, because it's essential to keep the roads in good repair. 

That eliminated another 2,870 employ- ees. Finding out exactly how much money the non-essential state employ- ees cost taxpayers was another prob- lem because the data did not show whether they worked full time or part time. Other states' payroll records may show this, and anyone else thinking about doing a similar story should cer- tainly ask for it. 

In this case, the $39 million figure we arrived at had to be qualified. We wrote in the story that the figure is probably high, but we also decided not to include the cost of health insurance and other benefits, which payroll officials say tack on another 30 percent onto the base pay. 

Once the data was in shape and I had created a separate spreadsheet show- ing only the non-essential hires, the remaining analysis consisted of simple sorts in Excel. Sorting by pay revealed the most expensive hires. Sorting by date showed who had been hired on or shortly after July 1. 

continued on page 15 

July . August 2003


9


IRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

# CAR TOOL GPS units add depth to reporting By Matthew Waite, St. Petersburg Times 

You won't hear me complaining about military spending anytime soon. The U.S. government - bless it - dropped $90 million to add another Global Po- sitioning System satellite at the end of March, and I gleefully paid my taxes two weeks later. 

Giddy about paying taxes? Sure. I'm happy to contribute my small sum to the 

curately. In the past, a reporter going after a plane that crashed in a remote area had to try to explain the accident location over the phone. Now, a re- porter with a GPS unit can, depending on how close he gets to the crash, plot the crash location within a few feet. 

GPS is a handy tool on deadline and off. Off deadline, I used GPS to create 

Untitled ArcMap ArtView
 Etc Edit View Insert Selection Inot Window Help

20,227

Layers

stpetestreets

stpete

Display
Source

Drawing
Arial


$2.5 billion Global Positioning System constellation of 28 satellites that sur- rounds the planet and blankets it with low-power radio waves. Before you re- port me to the mental health authori- ties, let me explain why I'm so happy: It helps me do my job as a reporter. 

I believe GPS is the best little-used tool in journalism. A GPS receiver, mapping software and a little know-how are all you need to do your own geographic analysis. Think of it as building your own databases, only with maps. 

You can do this all very quickly and ac- 

what the state of Florida lacked a few years ago: a map of traffic signal loca- tions. The state had only engineering drawings and computer-aided drafting files showing the locations. So I de- cided to create a map. I got in the car with my GPS and my wife at the wheel. Within an hour I had a point map of every traffic signal on a stretch of U.S. 19, a deadly road I was writing about. That map became an important part of my analysis in ArcView, because I could layer deaths and traffic control lights. On one section of roadway with the most traffic control lights, there were no deaths in more than a decade, 

Of all deaths, more than 80 percent were people crossing away from crosswalks. (See the story at www.sptimes.com/2002/01/20/ Pasco/At_any_time__crossing.shtml) 

On deadline, GPS can help locate events or create maps of new roads. 

Here's a step-by-step example of how I used GPS for a daily news story: 

One night, after deadline, I heard an emergency search call on the police radio scanner for a missing elderly man. This happens all the time in Florida, so I wasn't very interested. Then I heard someone call for a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter to pull him out of a swamp in the middle of the night. That sounded like news. 

So I went to the scene - a golf course covered in the darkness-and watched as a huge helicopter hovered over the man, lowered a basket down to a group of sopping wet sheriff's deputies and hoisted him away to a local hospital. 

That night, I grabbed as many inter- views with deputies that I could, and I grabbed a scorecard for the golf course. 

Early the next morning I returned with my GPS unit and laptop. I plotted the points where the man went into the swamp looking for golf balls and where the sheriff's deputies went into the swamp to find him. I also plotted the points of the tee box and cup from the nearest hole to where the man was found. Why do this? You can get de- tails like distances and reference points. And, using a satellite map of the area, you can also make great graph- ics. (See the story, without the graphic, at www.sptimes.com/2002/04/09/TampaBay/ Off_the_course_and_st.shtml) 

There are several ways to get GPS data from your unit into your geo- graphic information system software. The one I used until recently is Maptitude 4.05 or later. Within the past few months, ArcView 8.3, through a free download, has added GPS sup- port that rivals Maptitude's. ArcView 3.x 

10


July August 2003


Uplink 

users can find shareware and free scripts for almost any GPS device, though they are not nearly as easy or intuitive as ei- ther Maptitude or ArcView 8.3. 

Maptitude (www.caliper.com/ maptovu.htm) and now ArcView 8.3 (http://support.esri.com index.cfm?fa=downloa .samplesUtilities.viewSample &PID=43&MetalD=537) allow you to plug in your GPS unit via a serial cable (or USB, depending on the unit) that's often included with the unit. It plots your location live on a map. In one menu, you can configure and control your GPS unit, and control what data is displayed. 

Using either software package you can record events (points) and save them in various GIS formats. You can use your GIS program's distance measuring tool to calculate the dis- tances between points. That's how I measured how far the elderly man on the golf course was from the tee box. 

Believe it or not, GPS units aren't just for recording a position. One day I covered a new toll highway that was opening to traffic. Many, including my editors, wondered what the road would be like, how fast you could go from point A to point B, and so on. I went out with my GPS unit and drove my county's leg from one county line to the other several times. The first time I did it mostly to make a GIS map of the road that I could include in other maps of the county. But my GPS - a Garmin GPS III+ - also records speed: how fast was I going when the plot was taken. A few more times up and down the road, with traffic, stop- ping for tolls, and I had a pretty good average speed for the roadway. 

The analysis gave readers one sen- tence that no one else had: Average speed on the new road was 58 in a 65 mph zone. Not bad when you consider a driver has to stop twice unless his vehicle has an E-ZPass electronic tag that allows automated toll collection. 

Some journalists like to call those statements computer-assisted para- 

graphs, and GPS is great for them if you can get used to operating your unit quickly. For instance, I covered an experimental-plane crash deep in a nature preserve. We had to get an escort from the sheriff's office to take us nearly two miles into the preserve where the plane went down. The ex- perimental plane apparently lost power and tried to land on a nature trail. The cut in the trees wasn't wide enough for the wings, and you can figure out the rest. 

With my GPS, I was able to plot my location near the downed plan and the takeoff location (the distance was less than a half mile). I told our graphic artist about the location and they created a graphic that ran in the paper. 1 guess you call that computer- assisted graphics. 

The applications for GPS are as limit- less as the uses of GIS. With GPS units starting under $100, this is an inexpen- sive tool for the newsroom, one that we as a profession are missing out on. 

Contact Matthew Waite by e-mail at waite@sptimes.com. 

readme.tx 



You can find many good GPS tutorials on the Internet. This link contains a collection of information for beginners: www.edu-observatory.org/gps/ tutorials.html. 

## Buying a GPS 

In a few short years, the GPS mar- ket has taken off. Buyers will find plenty of choices and a range of prices to fit almost any newsroom budget. 

If you have a few thousand dollars to burn, Trimble and ESRI offer a promotional deal on a Trimble GPS, a Windows Pocket PC and ArcPad, ESRI's GIS for Pocket PC. At the other end of the spectrum, you can find a Magellan GPS 310 for $99 on Amazon.com. 

What you should buy depends on how you plan to use the unit. Are you, the GIS user, going to be the only one using it? Or are you going to circulate it in the newsroom? Do you need a map on screen, or can you live with just seeing coordinate points? 

The basics: If you don't already have one, you'll need a GIS. You also will need a GPS unit with a PC 

connection of some kind. Most, but not all, have them. You should prob- ably get one that's a little more rug- ged, since journalists seem to have a habit of dropping electronics. 

The extras: If you want to save a considerable amount of money and are comfortable dealing with latitude and longitude coordinates, buy a GPS unit without a built-in map and screen. Low-end GPS units, which take position points just as well as more expensive models, don't in- clude a scrolling map on their screen, just a compass. However, if you plan to hand the unit to nov- ices, having a screen with a map on it is a good idea: reporters tend to be more comfortable with the idea of seeing a map, pushing a button, and having a dot appear where they are. Consumer model GPS units with maps are getting more reason- ably priced. A Garmin Trex Vista, a popular consumer model, costs about $300. 

July August 2003


11


IRE Detabase Library 573.884.7711 

# Tech tip continued from page 13 

the end of the rankings and move it to Column B where it belongs. To do that, you could do a LEFT function for Column A (example: =LEFT(A82,2) for two-digit rankings, =LEFT(A104,3) for three digits) and a CONCATENATE for Column B. (In- sert a new column and type -CONCATENATE(RIGHT(A82,1)&B82).) 

So, is there any way to import data into Excel and keep the exact format- ting of columns? The good news - if you're willing to break the process into steps - is that yes, it's possible with Acrobat Reader 6.0. It has a new fea- ture that lets you select a column of text. Just click the "Select Text" tool and move the cursor toward the col- umn until it looks like a vertical bar with a box around it. 

Then highlight the column (See fig- ure 8), copy it, and paste into Excel. With steady mouse skills, you can even strip the column of rankings and keep them separate. Be creative - sometimes it's easier to copy a col- umn starting somewhere besides the upper-left hand corner. 

It works almost perfectly. The one big goof was that the column for news- paper ownership was blank in a 

couple of cases, but the data pasted into Excel without the spaces - so it stopped two rows short. That means you have to go back and reinsert the blank cells where they belong. You can also import the column headers with the data, but that requires tink- ering, too. For instance, "Rank in top 200" filled up four vertical cells in Col- umn A, just as it looks in the original. 

The other big drawback is that the Column Select tool highlights only the data that appears on your screen. So for this table, which runs six pages, you'd have to select each column and paste for each page. This is okay for a small table - but if you've got hun- dreds of pages, you might want to stick with one of the free downloads. 

The Challenge included a third docu- ment that several lists of the top-scor- ing schools in Missouri, motop 10.pdf. The same methods work with that document that worked with the ASNE table. Willis, for one, copied and pasted the data into UltraEdit and re- placed the ending parentheses in the school column with tabs, coded in the program as ")"t". He then replaced ev- ery number with spaces with tabs, coded in UltraEdit as ^1^t Willis im- ported that file into Excel, added the 

header row and saved it. (Note: UltraEdit costs $35.) 

In summary, here are some tips to keep in mind: 

Make sure you've got the most recent version of Acrobat Reader. Check back for updates. Here's a link for the latest version: www.adobe.com/products/acro- bat/readermain.html 
You can convert documents for free or close to nothing (less than $40), especially if you're willing to do a little cleaning. 
Yes, cleaning. No matter how you import something, chances are it won't be perfect. Spot-check your im- ported version with the original. Also be prepared to do a little work to get the column headers in the right place. 
Experiment. You can import the same file using more than one method. 

With some practice and patience, you might find that importing PDFs into Excel is almost as simple as A-B-C. 

Contact Holly Hacker by e-mail at holly@nicar.org 

Taxes
60 19.90%
33.00%.ZIP
Knight Ridde
218,1
 Fort
Lauderdale,
60.22.90%
38.10%,ZIP
Tribune
251.8

Mississippi
60:29.20%
48.70% ZIP
96,
 60:19.60% 32.70%,COUNTIESH
53,1

Spokane,
Washington
60 8.20% 10.40% ZZP
102.
 Texas
59.22.10% 37.50%.ZIP
Cox
183.2
 Alabama
59 19.00% 32.30%:ZIP
Advance (Newhouse)
145.5
 York,
New
York
58:17.80% 30.90%JUSA
Dow
1,800,
 57 6.80% 11.90%'ZIP
Omahn
190,2

North
Carolina
67 19.80% 34.70%,ZIP
McClatchy
163,2
 Georgia
57 21.30% 37.40%.ZIP
Cox
371,1
 Florida
57 8.20% 14.50% ZIP
95.2
 Washington
56'13.70% 24.30%'ZIP
167,
 Medison, Wisconsin
$ 4.00% 8.90% ZIP
89,1
 Quincy,
Massachusetts
5.50% 10.20% ZIP
68.5
 91U
54'16,70% 30,90% US
2,138,
 Framingham
Massachusetts
54.4.30% 8,00% ZIP
54,2

53.30.60% 58.00%IZIP
McCletchy
158,2

West
Palm
Beach,
Florida
52:15.20% 29.20% ZIP
Cox
171,9
 Pennsylvania
52.23.70% 45,90% 21P
Knight
150,
 D.C.
51.20.80% 40.50%21P
Washington Post
746,1

51 5.60% 11.00%'ZIP
Copley
68.4

Plains,
News
York
51'16.40% 32.20%,ZIP
'Garnell
139,
 Later
City,
Utah
7.80% 15.50%.ZIP
MediaNews
134,7

50.16.50%
33.20%/21P
Advance (Newhouse


Figure 7 

Figure 8 

14


July August 2003


Uplink 

SPOTLIGHT: JOBS, PAY & PERKS 

# Data for covering workers, compensation 

By David Herzog, University of Missouri and NICAR 

Journalists can use several key da- tabases to cover public employees, their salaries and benefits. Here are a few of the most valuable and what you can expect to find inside them: 

## Payrolls 

Payrolls list the names, departments, jobs and pay of government workers. The workers' hiring dates, pay rates, work status (part- or full-time) also should be included. Check the pay field carefully because agencies sometimes mix the hourly pay rates of wage earners in the same field with the monthly or weekly salaries of pro- fessional workers. Also, make sure you request the most detailed pay records you can get so you can look at overtime pay. 

Depending on your state's open records law, you might be able to get even more detailed information about workers, including home addresses and dates of birth. The more detailed information you can get, the better. 

Request this data from agency hu- man resources or personnel offices. Sometimes finance offices maintain the data. Update this data every year so you can build an archive that shows salaries over the years. 

## Pensions 

These databases list the names of pensioners, last date of employment and amounts of annual pensions. Many of these databases include the addresses of the pensioners and the types of pensions (disability or retirement). 

Depending on the complexity of the retirement system, there may be sev- eral types of pensions with distinct rules and cost-of-living adjustments. 

If there is more than one pension sys- tem, make sure your data includes a field that indicates the type of pension. 

Journalists have used pension data to show how some pensioners get more money off the job than when they worked. They've also used it to project how much pensioners will col- lect in the future. 

You can request this data from agency pension boards. If they do not keep the data, try the human re- sources, personnel or finance offices. 

## Check register 

The check register can be a great place to find information about public agency worker travel. A check regis- ter is a database that contains a record of every check issued by a government agency. 

Registers often include the check number, name of person or entity that the check was issued to, date, amount, department and purpose of payment (often a code). Sometimes the data includes an employee iden- tification number. 

Journalists can use this data to scour for employee travel, which may or may not be legitimate, and reim- bursed business expenses. In addi- tion, journalists can use the data to look for payments to consultants and contract workers who are not paid through the usual payroll channels. 

Try requesting this data from the trea- surer, comptroller or another govern- ment fiscal officer. 

Hiring continued from page 9 

Contact David Herzog by e-mail at dherzog@nicar.org. 

In a few cases, expensive employees were hired right after the freeze was lifted. The prime example was a De- partment of Education employee who was hired July 8 for $120,000 to help make sure state education reforms dovetailed with the federal "No Child Left Behind" initiative. Sorting by job description showed how many of each type of employee was hired. Sorting by state agency showed which sector of government did the most hiring. Ohio's lead welfare agency, the Department of Job and Family Services, hired 140 people. 

I also used Excel to calculate the aver- age cost of a subset of new hires. For example, I determined that the Depart- ment of Education hired 28 education consultants, people who act as liaisons with local school districts, at an aver- age $53,500 a year. 

This kind of analysis takes some time especially if you're learning just what payroll records can and cannot show you along the way. The result, I believe, is a story that offers a per- spective on state finances and spend- ing that only an independent observer can provide. 

Of course, you will also have to deal with state officials who probably will argue that every single person they've hired was out of an absolute necessity. 

The best response came from the Ohio Department of Taxation, which hired 55 auditors in December and January to beef up collections. While each audi- tor was paid an average $34,500 sal- ary, they claimed each collected about $457,000 in unpaid taxes. 

That prompted a spokesperson to say, "They are more than carrying their weight." 

Contact Spencer Hunt by e-mail at shunt@cincinna.gannett.com 

July August 2003


15


visit Web www.nicar.org 

# Better Watchdog Workshops 

## Investigative Reporting on the Beat 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc. and the Society of Professional Journalists, with funding from the SDX Foundation, have joined forces to offer this series of workshops. 

The workshops, specifically for journalists at small- to medium- sized news organizations, will emphasize the use of freedom-of- information laws and address juggling a beat while producing investigative and enterprise pieces. 

"You'll learn enough in the first 15 minutes to keep you busy for a month." Kevin McGrath, The Wichita Eagle 

Workshops are scheduled for: Sept. 11 - Tampa, Fla. Oct. 4 Long Island, N.Y. Oct. 4-5 - Eugene, Ore, Oct. 25 - State College, Pa. 

For more information, visit www.ire.org/training/ betterwatchdog 

To request a workshop for your area, send a note to watchdog@ire.org 

## Salaries 

continued from page 8 

university's medical schools, a find- ing that was true back in 1990. 

The breakdown was almost too good and too easy to be true. So I did more reporting, calling officials at the medi- cal schools and experts on medical school salaries. I found that the da- tabase did not tell the complete story. At face value the highest-paid state employee, a renowned surgeon, made about $600,000 a year from the state. But, as my reporting later re- vealed, most of the medical school deans and professors also practice medicine, thereby earning most of their so-called state salaries from pri- vate sources. 

After culling through names of individu- als who fit this category, I found that the highest-paid employee, whose $359,570 salary was completely state- funded, was the chancellor of the Uni- versity System of Maryland. That rev- elation changed the focus of the story, especially since the salary and de- ferred compensation package of the in- coming chancellor had recently raised questions at a time when the state was trying to close a $1 billion deficit. 

Instead of analyzing the database in the aggregate, I decided to focus my story on the chancellor's salary and look at why medical school person- nel received such high six-figure sala- ries, outranking the governor, judges and heads of state agencies. 

I also decided to write a separate story on the two coaches whose state salaries did not accurately reflect their overall compensation package. The database showed that the two coaches, Friedgen and Williams, made $183,820 and $207,584, re- spectively, when in fact, they were making nearly triple the pay of the chancellor. Because I was still wait- ing for my request to be answered at the time of deadline, I relied on pub- lished reports of the coaches' sala- 



ries to write my story. The story also touched upon the controversial issue of paying college coaches million- dollar salaries. 

The stories I found went further than the original intent of my reporting: to update the 1990 analysis of the 100 highest-paid state employees. If I had taken the database at face value, I would have incorrectly written that medical school personnel received the top salaries, a trend unchanged from 1990. Instead, I found that the university chancellor was the highest- paid employee whose salary was paid completely from state funds. 

The salary database did not require complicated queries or have many quirks. But the project was worthwhile because I learned a valuable lesson: No database is a substitute for good, thorough reporting. I also learned it's crucial to know the state's public in- formation law so you can be armed when going into battle with lawyers or agency administrators who don't want to give up information easily. 

As a final note, a few weeks after the story ran, the University of Maryland athletic department responded to my request and provided more details of the coaches' salaries, such as the amount of bonuses tied to perfor- mance. It pays to be persistent. 

Contact Hanah Cho by e-mail at hanah.cho@latimes.com. 

readme.tx


The "State Salaries" articles by Hanah Cho, published while she was a student at the University of Maryland, were finalists in the student work category of the 2002 IRE Awards. To order a reprint, contact the IRE Resource Center at 573-882-3364 or rescntr@ire.org and ask for Story No. 19441. 

16


July August 2003


Uplink 

# Overtime continued from page 1 

ficers making at least $90,000. Abundant overtime pay and a con- tract that allows police to work double shifts every day helped three dozen rank-and-file cops earn more than $100,000. The top-earning cop was a patrolman: Joseph Smith grossed $143,405, with overtime making up $86,215 of his total pay. 

The findings, published on May 25 in an article by Matt Burgard, our city police reporter, and me surprised not only Hartford residents, but also po- lice administrators and union officials. The Hartford Police Department did not monitor overtime earnings by indi- vidual officers, only by units. 

"Is this right?" the police chief asked, when shown a printout of the top overtime earn- ers. Then he turned to an aide and said, "Who the hell is Joseph Smith?" 

We uncovered the high salaries by analyzing data that all municipal beat reporters should have on their com- puter desktops: a city worker payroll list, broken down by department, base pay and overtime. 

I requested the data earlier this year with no particular story in mind. At a minimum, I figured the payroll would be helpful in checking names and sala- ries on deadline. 

Obtaining the city payroll data was easy, and analyzing it was simple even for a reporter using an Excel spread- sheet for the first time. 

## Laying groundwork 

Before requesting the data under the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act, I consulted with the city's infor- mation technology director and asked questions. How did the city maintain the records? What would it take to copy the entire payroll file to a CD-ROM? I had made a point of getting to know the director months earlier, asking him to give me a tour 

of the recently merged city-school board information technology sys- tem. By the time I filed my FOI re- quest by e-mail, I knew that produc- ing a copy of the payroll on a CD- ROM was a matter. of a few key- strokes for one of his staffers. 

Similar requests by The Courant have not always gone so smoothly. 

A few years ago, the Connecticut State Police tried to charge Jack Dolan, our resident computer-assisted reporting guru, a heart-stopping sum for a copy of its criminal convictions database. The state police figured copies of indi- vidual records cost $25 and there were 815,000 records in the database. So they multiplied $25 by 815,000. 

The bill came out to more than $20.3 million. Try burying that in an expense report. 

The newspaper instead opted for a lawsuit, resolved last year by the Connecticut Supreme Court. As a result, it is well-established law in Connecticut that public agencies can charge only reasonable fees for copying electronic records. 

The city of Hartford gave me a copy of its payroll data at no charge. 

With brief tutoring by Dolan, I started playing with the city data. 

The city provided the data on an Ex- cel spreadsheet at my request. I quickly realized, however, the data was incomplete. The city had provided me every employee's salary, not the ac- tual pay. Missing were overtime and longevity payments, small bonuses paid for years of service. 

I amended my FOI request to include all payments to employees, including longevity payments and overtime. This time the I.T. director gave me the bad news: Marrying overtime records with the payroll would require staff time for which he would have to charge me. We agreed on a price not to exceed $100 - a bargain for 6,700 

payroll records. The payroll records listed each em- ployee in alphabetical order with six other columns of data: department, regular pay, overtime, longevity pay, other pay and gross pay. 

Sorting by salary, I created a list of the city and school employees in de- scending order of gross pay. The list showed rank-and-file cops making more money than the city manager, police chief and other department heads. To find all the top overtime earners, I sorted again by overtime. 

## More reporting 

We put the analysis into a broader context by reporting more. Opportu- nities for overtime had been increas- ing every year as the department's force had been allowed to shrink. The police contract encouraged officers to take overtime when offered, especially as they neared retirement. Police pen- sions in Hartford are based on an officer's "final average income," taken from the best three of the last five years before retirement. 

Patrolman Smith declined to talk to us, though we were able to answer the chief's question: "Who the hell is Joseph Smith?" It turned out that Smith had achieved a measure of notoriety under a previous administration. He was ac- cused of loafing on the job and stealing city time. He was reinstated after a jury acquitted him in 1999. 

Officer Plummer Carroll, who finished just behind Smith with $80,606 in overtime, was happy to talk about his industrious ways. He took all the overtime offered to run up his pension calculation. He estimated that he averaged about 80 hours a week, with a high of 110 hours, over three years. 

"I missed out on a lot of beautiful things: holidays, weekends," Carroll said. 

His reward: an annual pension of $74,093-nearly $20,000 more than his base pay of $56,095. 

Contact Mark Pazniokas by e-mail at impazniokas@courant.com 

July August 2003


17


www.ire.org 

# Back tax continued from page 1 

Since Charlotte County stores delin- quent taxpayer information on a main- frame system, I asked for the data in ASCII. They provided the entire data- base for free. I imported the text into Microsoft Access 97. 

Not long after beginning a search through all the records, I discovered my first roadblock. The tax collector kept detailed information on each de- linquent, but surprisingly, no one had tallied up how much people owe in back taxes over the years. In fact, I was told no one had ever done a countywide calculation showing how much each delinquent owed in penal- ties over multiple years. Also, because interest kept adding up, the dollar fig- ure changed every day. But the tax collector's database showed only how much delinquents originally failed to pay. To get an accurate picture of the top tax delinquents, I needed to calcu- late the back tax information for more than 40,000 records. 

## Prep work 

After talking with the information tech- nology office for the tax collector, began writing a program in Access to calculate back taxes. To accomplish our task, we had to first calculate how many months had passed since each delinquency began. The more months without a payment, the more in back taxes owed. 

I created two new fields in Access and ran the calculations to show the num- ber of delinquent months and the monthly interest rate for each delin- quent. We used this information to calculate how much each delinquent owed in back taxes, but I still had to add a $4.25 penalty to each record to cover the cost of advertising the delinquency in a local newspaper. After completing the work, 1 finally thought we had all the information we needed. 

It didn't take long for us to discover I 

needed to merge the file with another county database to get an accurate picture of local delinquents. The da- tabase of tax certificates showed only the name of the person who owned the property the year its taxes be- came delinquent. We needed a sec- ond database to see the name of the current owner. Florida law states the current owner of property is respon- sible for all back taxes. 

I called the property appraiser's office and arranged to receive the electronic list of properties in Charlotte County. I merged the tax collector's information with the property appraiser's list by join- ing the files using the "strap number" field that serves as a property identi- fier. Finally, with information about cur- rent property owners in hand, we were able to generate the true list of top tax delinquents. 

## Beyond the data 

Our queries found that one company had piled up more than $950,000 in back taxes on more than 500 proper- ties. With a quick visit to the county clerk's office, we discovered the county's top tax delinquent was go- ing to have a very difficult time pay- ing its bill. Court records showed the company had gone bankrupt and hadn't paid its taxes for seven years in a row. Despite this fact, the county continued to spend tax dollars send- ing out delinquent notices and adver- tising its delinquency in the newspa- per year after year. 

This struck us as odd, since Florida law allows county governments to auction property if the owner remains delin- quent for more than two years. For some reason the county was bypass- ing the option to auction the properties off, a move that could recoup money and return the real estate to the tax rolls. 

By law, the tax collector must spend tax dollars advertising delinquencies three times a year for each piece of property that qualifies. We began more detailed queries, searching for all the delinquents that hadn't paid for years but were still draining the county's cof- 

fers. We calculated the tax collector had spent $251,712 since the mid-1990s trying to collect from deadbeats it could have cracked down on long ago. 

We eventually uncovered a total of $8.3 million in uncollected taxes across the county since the mid- 1990s. It's money that wasn't getting to essential services such as schools, fire departments and road construc- tion crews. More than $1 million of that would have gone to the Charlotte County Fire Department. Fire Chief Dennis DiDio told us it could have added new fire trucks, firefighters and equipment to fight bio-terrorism. 

## Putting it together 

Further research revealed Florida law requires county governments to auc- tion off all land worth more than $5,000, if the land has been delinquent for more than two years. If it's worth less than $5,000, counties can decide for them- selves if they want to go after the prop- erty. The $8.3 million in uncollected rev- enue we discovered was largely made up of properties worth less than $5,000. 

We found the county failed to put to- gether all the pieces on its own. It looked only at how much each delin- quent owed on individual pieces of land. No one ever thought to keep track of just how much delinquent land ex- listed under one person's name. We eventually discovered systematic proof that the county wouldn't crack down on a majority of delinquents who owned land assessed at $5,000 or less. 

We took our findings to the tax col- lector and the real property manager for Charlotte County. The tax collec- tor told us she wanted to immediately respond by auctioning off all the delin- quent land we discovered. However, that wasn't her decision to make. The real property manager decides which land to sell at tax auction. When we showed him our findings, he pledged his support for the tax collector's idea. The real property manager told us he would begin the process of auctioning off all the delinquent properties that qualified for the program. 

18


July August 2003


Uplink


The county clerk has agreed to post- pone some of its normal fees to speed the sale of the large number of proper- ties that will be auctioned off on the courthouse steps. The Charlotte County tax collector and the real prop- erty manager credit WBBH for discov- ering a potential source of millions of dollars in uncollected revenue. We're told Charlotte County will complete its auctions over the course of the next year. 

Contact Mark Greenblatt by e-mail at mark.greenblatt@nbc-2.com 

readme.txt 

The IRE Resource Center has copies of stories and tipsheets offering ideas for using CAR to analyze municipal and county tax records. Here are two: 

Story No. 20151: In 2002, The (Newark, N.J.) Star-Ledger analyzed local tax data and found that "the average residential property tax bill in New Jersey jumped almost 7 percent this year, the largest one-year increase since 1990." The story also discusses the overall rise in taxes from suburbs to rural areas. 

Story No. 19005: A 2001 Philadelphia Inquirer data analysis of millions of property tax records found disparities between the amount of taxes paid relative to residents' wealth. They discovered that in some cases, people living in lower- income areas were paying more in taxes than those living in higher-income areas were. 

To order, contact the Resource Center at rescntr@ire.org or 573-882-3364. 

# Unstacking the Deck: A Reporter's Guide To Campaign Finance 

The latest Beat Book from Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc., is a guide to navigating the language and practices of campaign finance. 



Journalists will find it invaluable for pursuing stories about the impact of money on elections, political parties and candidates at the federal, state and local levels. 

UNSTACKING
 THE DECK
 A Reporter's Guide
 to Campaign Finance

BY MICHAEL WEBER ARON/PILHOFER

FREK WILL

BRONVESTICATIVI


Understand the loopholes in soft money restrictions. 
Learn about the increased use of nonprofits to funnel money. 
Find out how to track where candidates spend their money. 
Learn how to find and read useful documents and data. 
Packed with resources, Web sites and story tips! 

## ORDER NOW 

By phone: Call 573-882-3364 with your VISA or MasterCard. By mail: Send your check to IRE, 138 Neff Annex, Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, MO 65211 By Web: Visit www.ire.org/store to order online or download an order form. 

IRE Members: $15 each Nonmembers: $25 each 

Plus postage: First class - $4 for the first book, $2 for each additional book 

July August 2003


19


IRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

# Incumbent continued from page 1 

Why is steak sauce important to a po- litical campaign? That was the key element of my first computer-assisted reporting project: A question. 

Finding New York's campaign finance database online was easy. After that, had to fall back on my Boot Camp training. Two pieces of advice became imme- diately useful - even critical - in do- ing the story: 

First, find a buddy to review your work. In my case, I tapped Brad Heath. He's a reporter in Detroit now, but he was my predecessor as Binghamton's CAR person and un- derstands my experience as a re- porter and my virtually nonexistent database skills. In fact, he knew the data I was working with, too, because he had briefly played with it. 

Second, give the database to the source. The campaign treasurer had done all the paperwork in filing the in- formation, and it was in his interest to 

REQUIRED READING For Your Newsroom 



UnderstandingCrime Statistics A Reporter's Guide, by Kurt Silver 

Know the data and reports available to add perspective and UNDERSTANDING authority to your CRIME crime reporting. STATISTICS Learn how to use the data and avoid common pitfalls while writing re- sponsible crime sta- tistics stories. 



ORDER TODAY! Call 573-882-3364 with your VISA or MasterCard -OR- Visit our Web site at www.ire.org/store for online ordering or order form downloads REMEMBERS:$15each*NONMEMBERS:$25each 

make sure I got my facts straight. He found a couple of errors in my queries. And with more than 3,000 potential sources, I still kept total control of what the story said. 

I learned a few other lessons. 

Do everything two or three times. It wasn't until I exported my query re- sults to Excel and checked the math that I realized the numbers didn't add up, and it was because of a problem in my query. At Boot Camp, they called these data integrity checks, and they are important. 

Review the data. The quick and easy task is to find the extremes in your data, and that frequently can be useful. But go through the rest of it, too. You'll come up with more questions. Why, for ex- ample, couldn't I find the local Repub- lican leaders contributing to the area's most prominent Republican, but I could find their spouses? You're not going to notice that unless you know both the data and your subject. 

I'm primarily a beat reporter so that kind of analysis was easy, even fun, once my co-workers and I made a game of finding how many names we recognized. I don't know how a reporter could do that coming into the data cold. 

I also had to learn what the data wasn't telling me, which meant I had to learn what it was supposed to say. Candidates for New York's state leg- islature generally contribute to a party "housekeeping" fund to pay for legal advice, polls and whatnot. Other poli- ticians had contributed to it, accord- ing to my analysis, but the state sena- tor hadn't. Either he was the state's biggest political cheapskate (unlikely) or there was another fund out there the data didn't have a record of. 

I had to learn to keep focus on my story - how the senator's campaign spent its money. There were plenty of other tempting angles to pursue. Why was the ambassador to Grenada my boy's biggest individual contribu- tor? And was the fact that he was in- 

dicted about 15 years ago (and later exonerated) on charges alleging he blew up trailers of a union protesting one of his facilities relevant? Fasci- nating stuff, but it wasn't part of the story I had in mind. Maybe next time. 

That's the lure of a good database. It gives you a garbage load of ideas. You can't do them all. Even if you could, you probably shouldn't. Overkill can be a nasty habit, and with all the time I sank into this project, it was a temptation. 

The story described how campaigning works and what it means to a community. 

And that was the toughest lesson of all. Making the database work took a solid 20 hours - as much as I nor- mally devote to a basic, no-frills en- terprise package. And because a da- tabase generates about three num- bers and a nut graf - and maybe some charts or lists or facts for a box - that meant that once I found the good stuff, I still had 15 or 20 hours of work remaining. 

CAR stories are inexpensive com- pared with other investigative stories of similar depth, but they're inefficient compared with traditional methods. That can be an issue at a community newspaper, where cutting somebody free from the daily need to feed the beast can be a burden on everybody else. Fortunately, Heath taught my editors that so I didn't have to. 

Through all of this, Heath double- checked my work and cheered me up when I felt dumb. With his help, I learned to rewrite queries to make them as simple as possible. The easy 

20


July August 2003
