# Investigative Reporters and Editors (IRE) and the Missouri School of Journalism

# Announcement

The leading educational association of journalists, based at the nation's first journalism school, is seeking a management team to lead IRE into the 21st Century. The fastest-growing organization in journalism, IRE offers a host of services to the profession and is expanding efforts to train journalists who are using computers to gather and analyze information. If you have proven yourself as a journalist and a manager, we want to hear from you.

**EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.** We're seeking an energetic chief executive who will relish helping other journalists worldwide; oversee a half-million dollar budget; manage a crackerjack staff of eight; raise funds; guide development of educational programs and publications; plan conferences; and spread the word about the services of IRE. The executive director reports to an elected volunteer board of 11 journalists. A seasoned journalist is preferred but not required. The ideal candidate will have demonstrated administrative effectiveness; a master's degree or equivalent combination of education and experience; and well-developed skills of organization and communication. If you know about using computers to get stories, you will have an edge. This faculty position at the Missouri School of Journalism includes teaching, and enjoys generous benefits.

**MANAGING DIRECTOR,** institute for computer-assisted reporting, based at the Missouri School of Journalism. This hands-on manager will have the unique opportunity to design and implement programs to train journalists, educators and students in computer-assisted reporting. These programs will include training in newsrooms; an electronic bulletin board for journalists and journalism organizations around the world to share information; a newsletter and other publications; a library of government databases; assistance on management and technical issues; and training materials. This is a faculty position at the Missouri School of Journalism. The ideal candidate will have a strong background in computer-assisted reporting; demonstrated administrative effectiveness in journalism or academia; an entrepreneurial spirit; a master's degree or an equivalent combination of education and experience; and excellent communication skills.

**TRAINING DIRECTOR,** institute for computer-assisted reporting. This is primarily a traveling position, teaching computer-assisted reporting in newsrooms and classrooms. The training director will be involved in developing all facets of the institute's educational programs. The ideal candidate will have extensive experience in computer-assisted reporting; demonstrated effectiveness as a teacher or coach; master's degree or equivalent combination of education or experience; and excellent communication skills. This staff position could be suitable for a professional or scholar on a leave of absence or sabbatical.

**ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR/SYSTEMS,** institute for computer-assisted reporting. This associate director will coordinate technical services for computer-assisted reporting and help develop IRE's educational programs. Direct responsibilities include launching an electronic bulletin board; administering the IRE databases and network; designing educational software; writing technical manuals; and advising journalists on technical issues. The ideal candidate will have a bachelor's degree or equivalent combination of education or experience; journalism experience; teaching experience; experience in problem-solving with various hardware and software environments, including networks; experience with computer-assisted reporting; and excellent communication skills.

IRE is a nonprofit educational association, founded in 1975, with 4,500 members worldwide. The University of Missouri-Columbia is one of the Midwest's largest educational institutions. Columbia is a city of 70,000 halfway between St. Louis and Kansas City, chosen by Money Magazine as one of America's most-livable cities.

As affirmative action/equal opportunity employers, IRE and the Missouri School of Journalism encourage minorities, women and persons with disabilities to apply.

Candidates should send a cover letter, resume and three reference letters to Steve Weinberg, IRE/Journalism Search Committee, 100 Neff Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo. 65211. Review of applications will begin Oct. 1 and continue through the month.
