# Hook, Line & Pulitzer: CAR Catches Big Fish

**By John McQuaid**
*The Times-Picayune*

When *The Times-Picayune* assigned three reporters — me, Mark Schleifstein, and Bob Marshall — to look into local and global problems in fisheries, we weren't sure what to make the confusing tableau before us. News pages carried reports of scattered problems in the Gulf of Mexico region, New England, Canada, the Pacific Northwest and elsewhere. But the troubles seemed unrelated — they happened in diverse locales, with different cultures and distinct populations of fish.

We soon found out that the problems were connected — mainly through emerging links of the global marketplace. Neither ecosystems, nor tradition-bound local markets and communities, could keep up with growing demand and development. CAR played an important role in helping us demonstrate the economic web that connects diverse locales and fisheries together, and showing alarming trends that both policymakers and the media had not detected or had ignored. Those conclusions formed the cornerstone of our eight-part series "Oceans of Trouble: Are the World's Fisheries Doomed?" that won the Pulitzer Prize for Public Service.

Healthy fisheries depend on two things — markets and sustainable fish populations. So I set out to gather as much data on catch, economics and fish stocks as I could. Most of it came from the National Marine Fisheries Service, the federal agency that oversees fishing in federal waters, but some came from state agencies as well. I got extensive historical data on catches and their total for all important fish species in the Gulf of Mexico, and data on the aggregate regional catches from every part of the United States. Using Excel, I normalized catch values with the Consumer Price Index and studied trends across the last four decades.

The numbers showed that fishing in the Gulf and elsewhere was in the midst of a catastrophe.

After a dramatic expansion of fishing in the 1970s and 1980s, the data showed, fishing had taken a nosedive. The most important Gulf fish had plummeted in the amount of catch, in per-pound value, or both during the preceding decade. Further reporting showed that these trends were the result of overfishing, tough new regulations to control it and an influx of cheap imported fish. Nationally, the same pattern held. What's more, the numbers of boats plying the waters had steadily climbed and remained high — meaning there were many more fishermen, but a lot less fish and money in the business than there had been 20 years ago. Many fishermen were, in fact, leaving the business and the ones still in it were barely hanging on.

But we also ran into problems. Fisheries Service data was maddeningly sketchy. The government had virtually no information on the economic or social status of fishers in the United States — almost no census data, nothing on employment levels, nothing on incomes.

The only data that could directly point to economic conditions were records of fishing licenses and the numbers of boats — data that the agencies said were probably only a rough estimate of the real number of boats out there. The quality of data on specific fisheries wasn't much better.

The Fisheries Service has data on catches and how much money they generated. But in an era when fish populations are in danger, the agency hadn't done much of the necessary biological analysis to determine whether many fish were being overexploited.

These information gaps themselves became part of the story. They illustrated not just holes in the government's information-gathering, but underlying biases and systemic problems. Agencies have traditionally managed fisheries like a big biology experiment, paying no attention to the people doing the fishing. That was fine with fishermen. Fishing is an important, but highly irregular enterprise. Crews shift regularly, some fishermen only work part of the year, and most understandably shun contact with government officials. Now, with fisheries in trouble, the entire management system had on one level broken down, and agencies did not have the information they needed to work with fishing communities.

The system was failing in another, deeper way. Agencies usually did not focus on specific populations of fish before they started to disappear — because it can take years to gather enough data to give a good picture of what's going on underwater, and because they lacked the resources. As one scientist put it, this was a "science of elegant post-mortems."

One other database trick helped demonstrate this point. Looking for a way to analyze whether the government's actions to protect fisheries were working, I got a list of all fishery management plans used by the Fisheries Service for the last 20 years, including hundreds of amendments and updates. Taking this as a raw indicator of regulatory activity, I used Excel to total the amendments by plan, by region, and by year. The results indicated that the government was consistently behind the curve, producing a mind-boggling complex pile of regulations to protect fisheries only after they were depleted.

Schleifstein and I also subscribed to fisheries-related mailing lists that generated dozens of messages ranging from the useful to the ridiculously arcane each day. For example, the Fishfolk listserv administered by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology brings together social scientists, managers, biologists and fishermen in a freewheeling discussion. Because they offered a mosaic of expertise and opinion, the lists were useful for developing and refining some of the framing ideas of the series. They were also useful for more mundane tasks — tracking down sources, or answering technical questions. At one point, I was curious about the origin of the fishery science terms "recruitment" (what happens when fish reach a catchable age) and "year class" (all the fish born in a given year). So I posted the question to the lists. I got dozens of responses, including one from a curious scientist who went to a library and researched the question for me. The terms originated early in the century, apparently in the work of Russian scientists. I was a little disappointed that they didn't come from college football, as some had theorized.

The Fishfolk list also provided me with one additional benefit. Trish Clay, a Fisheries Service anthropologist, was one of its founders. I was impressed with her posts to the list, and arranged via e-mail to interview her. We're now engaged to be married in October.

*John McQuaid can be reached at (202) 383-7889, or send e-mail to John.McQuaid@pressroom.com*
