# Mapping It Out: Plotting political moves

*This Uplink feature shows the latest uses of mapping in news reporting.*

It's the political season — a great time to hunt for stories that show your readers and viewers the pockets of political power in your area. A number of journalists have turned to geographic information system (GIS) software to visualize campaign contributors and election results and find stories that otherwise might have been hidden inside tables of data.

## Results and turnout

In early May, *The Star-Ledger* in Newark, N.J., mapped the results for the primary election race between incumbent Mayor Sharpe James and challenger Cory Booker, a city councilman. Using ArcView, CAR specialist Robert Gebeloff created a thematic map that showed the areas taken by each and by what margin. For the analysis, Gebeloff mapped a polygon file showing the city voting districts and shaded the layer with four colors that displayed the victory margin percentage for each candidate. Graphic artist Angela Porter took the information generated by Gebeloff and created a map for publication. The voting district files came from the U.S. Census Bureau and had to be edited to reflect redistricting changes.

The day after the election, Gebeloff dug deeper and used ArcView to show how voter turnout contributed to the mayor's primary triumph. He recycled the voting district map and this time shaded it with just two colors: one for the districts won by James and another for the districts taken by Booker. Gebeloff next overlaid another copy of the voting district polygon file and displayed it as a density map that created a dot for every 20 voters casting ballots in the election. The map showed that James fared well and drew a large turnout in the city's most densely populated wards, while Booker failed to generate as high a turnout in the areas he won.

## Race and recall

Reporters at the *Flint* (Mich.) *Journal* used analytic mapping for a February story about the petition drive to secure a recall election of the city's black mayor. A team of three reporters spent weeks entering into an Excel spreadsheet key pieces of information, including the names and addresses of the 13,000 people who signed recall petitions. Mary Ann Chick Whiteside, the new media manager at the paper, plotted those addresses in MapInfo, using the MapMarker geocoding tool to create a point for each address. She manually created voter precinct maps in MapInfo, using a paper map as a guide. Then, with both layers open in MapInfo, she assigned the precinct number to each signer of the petition.

Finally she analyzed the petitioner data and the results were telling: more than 70 percent of the 10,000 valid signatures came from predominantly white neighborhoods. Less than 10 percent of the valid signatures came from predominantly black neighborhoods. (See the story on the Web at *www.mlive.com/news/fljournal/index.ssf?/fljournal/special/stories/recall_2.html*). After the reporters confronted recall leaders with the results of the analysis, the leaders admitted that they had targeted white neighborhoods for their drive.

## Mapping contributions

The Center for Responsive Politics used GIS to take a look at the source of 1999 presidential candidate contributions. Using Maptitude, the center created for each state a trio of three-dimensional maps showing the population of every ZIP Code and the amount of contributions to Democratic candidates and Republican candidates. The maps clearly showed that the contribution patterns often failed to mirror population patterns. You can see the maps on the Web at *www.opensecrets.org/states/presmap.asp*.

## Election Machine

Any journalist who's interested in mapping election results should check out the Election Machine package developed by Neil Reisner of the *Miami Daily Business Review*. IRE and NICAR have made it available for download at *www.nicar.org/electmach/index.html*.

The Election Machine provides the tools you need to jumpstart your election coverage using GIS. You'll find Access, Excel and ArcView files and a PowerPoint slideshow that explains how to use the tools.

Reisner, the developer of the package, is a former national trainer for NICAR.

*Would you be willing to share a mapping example with fellow journalists? Send an electronic copy of the map along with details to David Herzog at **dherzog@nicar.org***
